The Caregiver’s
Handbook
 
A guide to getting started, finding support,
and taking care of yourself

Table of Contents
Introduction, 2
 
Chapter 1: Getting Started, 5
Chapter 2: Finding the Care You Need at Home , 11
Chapter 3: Choosing a Long-Term Care Facility, 20
Chapter 4: Covering the Costs of Caregiving, 2 7
Chapter 5: Coordinating Medical Care, 33
Chapter 6: Planning Ahead , 40
Chapter 7: Caring for Yourself as a Caregiver, 47
Summary, 52
 
For More Information, 53
 
Worksheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55 
“There are only four kinds of
people in the world —
those who have been caregivers,
those who are currently caregivers,
those who will be caregivers,
and those who will need caregivers.”
Rosalynn Carter

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
What is a caregiver?
A caregiver is someone who helps another 
person with everyday activities, medicines, 
appointments, or other tasks . An informal 
caregiver is usually a family member, 
friend, or neighbor . These people are 
generally not paid for their help . This guide 
is meant for informal caregivers . 
A formal caregiver (for example, a nurse or 
health aide) is paid for their services . They 
may provide care in a person’s home or in 
another setting, such as an adult day care 
center, residential facility, or long-term
care facility .
Some people use the term care partner 
rather than caregiver to show that 
caregiving is a two-way street involving 
both the caregiver and the person needing 
care . However, a partnership may not be 
possible if a loved one needs significant 
help or cannot care for themselves . In this 
guide, we use the term caregiver, but the 
information also applies to care partners . 
You may also see the term care team, which 
refers to all the people who are providing 
care to a person . The team may include 
family, friends, volunteers, health care 
providers, formal caregivers, and others .
Introduction
T
his guide is for anyone 
who provides care for 
family members or friends 
who need help with daily living . 
It focuses on the needs of older 
adults who require care because 
of a serious health condition 
or disability, but it could also 
apply to other situations in which 
caregiving is needed . Included 
are tips to help you as a caregiver 
and ways to get support, as well 
as guidance on how to take care 
of yourself . The worksheets at 
the end of this guide provide 
questions to help coordinate care 
and checklists to keep track of 
your caregiving responsibilities and 
needs . Additionally, each chapter 
includes caregiving resources that 
can provide further information 
and support .

I N T R O D U C T I O N
Caregiving can take many forms . The kinds 
of activities that a caregiver may assist with 
include:
• Household tasks, such as shopping, 
laundry, and cleaning 
• Personal care, such as dressing, 
bathing, grooming, using the toilet,
and brushing teeth 
• Getting in and out of beds and chairs
or walking 
• Taking and keeping track of medicine 
• Medical care, for example, keeping 
wounds clean or giving shots
• Preparing food, feeding, and monitoring 
dietary restrictions
• Transportation, such as car rides to 
appointments 
• Health care, including talking to 
doctors, making medical decisions, 
researching care services, and 
coordinating doctor visits 
• Money and finances, such as handling 
bills and budgets 
• Legal matters, including managing 
official documents such as wills and 
insurance policies
Caregiving By the Numbers
Most caregivers also have
other jobs and responsibilities
yet spend an average of 
24 hours
each week caring for a loved one.
1 in 6 adults who are not 
currently caregivers expect to
provide care in the future to a
friend or family member.
About 1 in 4
Americans are caregivers.

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Most of the information in this guide is designed for people who 
are taking care of older relatives and friends . However, many 
grandparents and older adults are caregivers for grandchildren and 
other young relatives . These child care arrangements are often called 
grandfamilies (in the case of grandparents and grandchildren) or, more generally, 
kinship families . 
These resources can provide information and support for grandfamilies and
kinship families:
The Child Welfare Information Gateway 
This service of the Administration for Children and Families offers information, 
resources, and tools for kinship caregivers, including grandparents . 
800-394-3366 
info@childwelfare.gov | www.childwelfare.gov/topics/outofhome/kinship 
The National Family Caregiver Support Program
This program from the Administration for Community Living provides information 
and assistance via state governments to family caregivers, including older relatives 
(not parents) age 55 and providing care to children under the age of 18 .
202-401-4634 
https://acl.gov/programs/support-caregivers/national-family-caregiver-
support-program
Additional resources for caregivers are listed at the end of this guide .
Grandfamilies and Kinship Families

I
f you have never been a caregiver 
before, it may feel daunting at first. 
There might be tasks to organize, new 
medical terms to learn, and schedules to 
coordinate . If you live far away, you may 
need to find new ways to stay in touch.
This chapter will help you figure out 
where to start as a caregiver and how to 
coordinate with family and friends to
share responsibilities . 
How can I tell whether a family 
member or friend needs help? 
It is not always clear whether someone 
needs help . Sometimes a person will 
recognize that they need help and request 
it, or an emergency or sudden illness will 
make it clear that assistance is needed . But 
there are often other signs that indicate 
someone may need extra support .
A phone call, email, or text message is not 
always the best way to tell whether an older 
adult needs help handling daily activities .
Getting Started
Chapter 1:
“Caregiving can be overwhelming, 
especially at the beginning. Try to 
tackle one task at a time.”
C H A P T E R 1 : G E T T I N G S TA R T E D
 
Alicia was worried about her Uncle James . He lived 
alone and took care of the house by himself . He 
sounded fine when she spoke with him on the phone, 
but she wasn’t sure how he was really doing . The last 
time she stopped by for a visit, she noticed dishes 
piled up in the sink and clothes scattered on the floor 
in his bedroom . Because he was usually very neat and 
tidy, Alicia was concerned that he might need more 
support and wondered how she could help . 
After exploring resources through a local senior center, Alicia planned another 
visit to look for trouble spots and, with permission, to talk with one of her uncle’s 
neighbors . Once she knew more about the situation, she was able to have an open 
conversation with her uncle about what types of support would be most useful . 
Although she didn’t live nearby, she was able to coordinate an aide to come by 
regularly to help her uncle manage his home . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
The person might not want to worry you, 
or they might not want to admit that they’re 
often too tired or sick to cook a meal or 
clean up .
When you spend time at the person’s home, 
you might notice possible trouble spots . 
Some examples include:
• Is the person taking their medications
and going to their medical appointments?
• Can the person prepare meals on a stove 
safely?
• Are they bathing regularly and wearing 
appropriate clothing for the weather?
• Is the home relatively clean and free
of clutter? 
Make sure that any potentially dangerous 
situations are addressed as soon as possible . 
In addition to safety issues and the overall 
condition of the home, the person’s mood 
and general health could indicate a need for 
help . Sometimes depression in older people 
is confused with normal aging . A depressed 
older person might brighten up for a phone 
call or short visit, but it’s harder to hide 
serious mood problems during an extended 
visit . Other signs relate to the person’s 
general health . These include whether they 
have gained or lost significant weight, have 
poor hygiene, seem confused, have fallen, 
seem lonely or isolated, or have trouble 
walking . Seek help right away if the person 
says they feel hopeless or have no reason 
to live, if they’ve lost interest in things they 
previously enjoyed, or if you’re worried they 
may harm themselves . 
With the older adult’s permission, it can 
be helpful to check in with others who see 
them regularly — such as neighbors, friends, 
doctors, or relatives — and ask these people 
to call you if they have any concerns . 
I’m new to caregiving. Where 
do I start? 
Caregiving can be overwhelming, especially 
at the beginning . Try to tackle one task at a 
time . Here are some ways to get started:
Find out as much as you can about the 
person’s medical situation. Learn about 
the person’s health and any treatments 
they are receiving . Knowing the details of 
their situation can help you understand 
what is going on, anticipate how an 
illness might change or worsen over time, 
and manage the person’s health care . It 
can also make talking with the person’s 
doctors easier and reduce the likelihood of 
a medical crisis .
The older person may be hesitant to share 
their health information . They may not 
If you or someone you know is struggling with thoughts of suicide, a 
mental health or substance abuse crisis, or any other kind of emotional 
distress, immediate help is available . Call or text the 24-hour 988 
Suicide & Crisis Lifeline at 988 or call 800-273-TALK (800-273-8255) .
When To Get Emergency Help

C H A P T E R 1 : G E T T I N G S TA R T E D
want to worry you, or they may not want 
others to know how serious their health 
issues have become . Approach these 
conversations sensitively and explain why 
you’re asking questions about their health . 
If the person isn’t comfortable talking about 
it themselves, they may be willing for you to 
talk with their health care provider instead . 
By law, you will need written permission 
to receive medical information about the 
person unless they are with you in person 
and able to give consent . The health care 
provider’s office can explain the process 
and provide the necessary forms . 
Determine where to get help. Consider 
asking family members and friends to share 
caregiving tasks . If someone you know 
and trust is also a caregiver, ask them for 
tips and recommendations for resources 
near you . You can also look for resources 
online or in your community, such as local 
and state offices on aging, social service 
agencies, or nearby senior centers . 
The Eldercare Locator can help you find 
resources in your area, including in-home 
help, transportation, and modifications to 
make a person’s home safer and easier to get 
around . It can also provide information about 
paying for care . You can contact the Eldercare 
Locator at https://eldercare.acl.gov or by 
calling 800-677-1116 .
Get training if needed. Many people 
don’t have caregiving experience when 
they are first needed. Caregiver training 
is available from many sources, including 
hospitals, state and local governments, and 
nonprofit organizations. Training courses 
are often free or low-cost, and some can be 
completed online . Medicare and Medicaid, 
which are government insurance programs, 
will sometimes pay for caregiver training .
How can I share caregiving 
responsibilities with others? 
Caring for an older person often requires 
teamwork with family, friends, or formal 
caregivers . While a person who lives 
nearby might take on most of the everyday 
responsibilities, people who live farther 
away can also play an important role in 
coordinating care . 
These steps can help you decide how best 
to share caregiving tasks: 
Define the caregiving responsibilities. 
You could start by setting up a meeting 
or conference call with the person and 
everyone who will be involved in their care . 
This conversation will be most productive 
when there is not an emergency . A calm 
discussion about what kind of care is 
wanted and needed now, and what might 
be needed in the future, can prevent a lot of 
confusion and misunderstanding later . 
Decide who will be responsible for which 
tasks. When several people are involved 
in caregiving, many find that the best first 
step is to name a primary caregiver . This 
is the person who takes on most of the 
everyday caregiving responsibilities . Even if a 
primary caregiver is not needed immediately, 
identifying someone now will allow that 
person to step in right away if there is a crisis .
Ideally, each person providing care will be 
able to take on the tasks best suited to 
“Caregiver training is available from 
many sources, including hospitals, 
state and local governments, and 
nonprofit organizations.”

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
their skills and interests . When thinking 
about everyone’s strengths, consider what 
each person is particularly good at and 
how those skills might help in the current 
situation: 
• Who is best at finding information and 
keeping people up to date on changing 
conditions? 
• Who is most comfortable using email, 
text messages, and other forms of 
technology? 
• Who do people call when they need 
emotional support and someone to
talk to? 
• Who is most confident about speaking 
with medical staff and conveying 
information to others? 
• Who lives close enough to assist with 
day-to-day tasks, such as grocery 
shopping, cooking, and cleaning? 
• Who likes coordinating larger tasks, 
such as helping to organize a move? 
• Who is good with numbers? Could they 
take charge of tasks such as paying 
bills, keeping track of bank statements, 
and reviewing insurance policies and 
reimbursement reports?
 
• Other than the primary caregiver, who 
can step in to help occasionally? For 
example, can someone else stay with 
the person needing care so the primary 
caregiver can take a short break or go
on vacation? 
Be honest about your limits. No one can be 
expected to do everything . Be gentle with 
yourself and realistic about how much you 
can do and what you are willing to do . For 
example, you might ask yourself: 
• How will my decision to take on 
caregiving responsibilities affect my 
work and home life? 
• If I don’t live nearby, how often, both 
mentally and financially, can I afford
to travel? 
• Am I emotionally prepared to take on 
what may feel like a reversal of roles 
between me and the older person — 
such as taking care of my parent instead 
of my parent taking care of me? Can I 
continue to respect their independence? 
• Can I be calm and assertive when 
communicating with the older person 
and any other caregivers? Could I seek 
advice or training to get better at this?
 
To keep everyone involved in caregiving informed, it may be useful 
to compile a notebook with details about the person’s medical care, 
social services, contact numbers, financial information, and other 
pertinent details . This list can be created and updated electronically or in a 
paper notebook that’s kept in a central location . There are also smartphone apps that 
enable you to divide up caregiving duties, keep an appointment calendar, and share 
updates with others . Whichever format you choose, make sure everyone has access 
to the caregiving notebook and that it is reviewed regularly and updated as needed . 
Stay in the Know With a Caregiving Notebook

C H A P T E R 1 : G E T T I N G S TA R T E D
Update the plan for sharing tasks as 
circumstances change. Over time, 
caregiving responsibilities may need to 
be revised . There can be changes in the 
needs of the person receiving care and in 
family members’ availability . Check in with 
the person receiving care and the other 
caregivers regularly to make sure the 
current arrangement is still working
for everyone . 
Worksheet: Coordinating Caregiving 
Responsibilities, on page 55 of this 
guide, can help you have a productive 
conversation about identifying and sharing 
caregiving tasks . 
Who is a long-distance 
caregiver and how can that 
person help? 
Many people live far away from their family 
or friends who need help . If you don’t live 
nearby, you can still provide support and 
assistance as a long-distance caregiver . 
From a distance, you may be able to: 
• Assist with finances, money 
management, insurance claims, or 
paying bills
• Arrange for care management or in-
home care by hiring formal caregivers 
such as home health aides
• Order medical equipment, medicines, 
and other supplies the person needs
• Research long-term care options,
such as an assisted living facility or 
nursing home
• Serve as an information coordinator by 
researching information about relevant 
health conditions and medicines, 
navigating changing needs, and 
overseeing insurance benefits
• Keep family and friends informed
and updated
• Plan occasional in-person visits to see 
how things are going and to help the 
primary caregiver, the person who takes 
on most of the everyday caregiving 
responsibilities 
Make the most out of your visits with your 
loved one . Talk to the person ahead of 
time and find out what they would like to 
do during your visit . Also check with the 
primary caregiver, if appropriate, to learn 
what they need . You may be able to handle 
some of their caregiving responsibilities 
while you are in town . These conversations 
can help you set clear-cut and realistic 
goals for the visit . Decide on your top 
priorities — that may mean reserving other 
tasks for a future visit . 
Because there’s a lot to do during a short 
visit, it’s easy to overlook simply spending 
time with the person and doing things 
together . Try to make time for activities 
unrelated to being a caregiver, such as 
watching a movie, playing a game, enjoying 
music, or taking a drive . Finding time to 
enjoy something simple and relaxing 
together is good for everyone . 
Several organizations offer information and 
tips for long-distance caregivers . Check out 
the websites of AARP (www.aarp.org), the
Caregiver Action Network
(www.caregiveraction.org), or the Family 
Caregiver Alliance (www.caregiver.org) 
and search “long-distance .” The Eldercare 
Locator can also provide resources for 
long-distance caregivers, including a guide 
called “Caring Across the Miles .” Visit the 
Eldercare Locator online at
https://eldercare.acl.gov or call 800-677-1116 .

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
When you don’t live close by, it may take more effort to find out 
what’s going on and stay up to date with an older person’s needs . 
Here are some strategies and technologies that long-distance 
caregivers can use to stay connected: 
• Create a list of important phone numbers and email addresses . Keep it in a 
shared document or spreadsheet online and update it regularly . 
• Set up a shared calendar online or in a smartphone app to coordinate with
other caregivers .
• With permission, attend the person’s telehealth visits . Telehealth visits are 
remote appointments with health care providers often done with video 
conferencing . Learn more about telehealth on page 35 of this guide . 
• Participate remotely in conference calls or video meetings with the assisted 
living facility team or nursing home staff . 
• Help the older person learn about the features of their mobile or smart phone, 
such as texting and video calls .
• If the older person is comfortable using a computer or tablet, set up an email 
account for them and teach them how to stay safe online . (See “Beware of 
Scams!” on page 14 of this guide .)
Staying in Touch

C H A P T E R 2 : F I N D I N G T H E C A R E Y O U N E E D AT H O M E
Finding the 
Care You 
Need at Home 
Chapter 2:
L
ong-term care services help people 
live as independently and safely as 
possible when they can no longer 
perform everyday activities on their own . 
This care is provided in different places by 
different caregivers, depending on a person’s 
needs . In many cases, long-term care is 
provided at home by informal caregivers, 
such as family members, friends, and 
neighbors . It can also be supplemented by 
formal caregivers, including in-home and 
community services . This chapter offers 
suggestions and resources for long-term 
care to support an older adult who wishes 
to continue living in their home . 
How do I know if an older 
adult can continue living at 
home safely? 
Many people want the same things as 
they get older: to stay in their own homes, 
to maintain independence for as long as 
possible, and to turn to family and friends 
 
Marlon’s 80-year-old mother moved in with him about 
a year ago so he could care for her . He loves her and 
is happy to help, but lately she needs more assistance 
around the house . Sometimes Marlon feels exhausted 
and overwhelmed, and he feels guilty that she is alone 
while he’s at work . A friend suggests that Marlon 
consider having a professional come in to help .
Marlon isn’t sure where to start, so he searches online 
for services in their area. He finds a professional 
service that can help his mother with meals, housekeeping, and personal care . 
After reading reviews and checking references, he hires an aide from the service to 
be with his mother for a few hours each morning . Marlon’s mom is now getting the 
help she needs, and Marlon doesn’t worry as much when he’s at work .

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
for help when needed . But many older 
adults and their families have concerns 
about safety, getting around, or other daily 
activities . Living at home as a person ages 
requires careful consideration and planning . 
To get started, you can think about the kinds 
of help an older person needs now and might 
want in the future . Maybe the person lives 
alone and is struggling with daily tasks that 
they could previously do on their own . Maybe 
they will soon need more support because 
their neighbor who helped with grocery 
shopping and yardwork is moving out of the 
area . Or maybe their partner recently passed 
away, so there is no longer another person 
to share the household responsibilities . The 
best way to know what someone needs is 
to ask them directly . However, if the person 
can’t acknowledge their need for help or is 
unwilling to ask for it, you may need to be 
more proactive .
Another step is to consider any illnesses, 
such as diabetes or emphysema, that the 
older person might have . Find out about how 
the illness could make it hard for them to 
get around or take care of themselves in the 
future . The person’s health care provider may 
be a good place to start . (Chapter 5 of this 
guide, which begins on page 33, has tips for 
talking with an older person’s doctor .)
Additional factors to consider include: 
• Can the older person take care of 
themselves independently?
• Does the person have family, close 
friends, and other support?
• Is the home set up to meet the needs 
of an aging person? Do you have any 
concerns about their safety? See 
Worksheet: Home Safety Checklist, on 
page 59 of this guide, for tips on making 
an older person’s home safer . 
Talk with the older adult and any other 
caregivers about what support would be 
needed for the older person to stay in their 
home . Be realistic and plan to revisit the 
decision as the person’s care needs change 
over time .
How can I make an older 
person’s home safer and more 
accessible? 
There are a variety of ways to make an 
older adult’s surroundings safer and easier 
to manage . Go through the house room by 
room to identify potential problems and 
safety issues . First correct any immediate 
dangers, such as loose stair railings and 
poor lighting, and then work on other ways 
to ensure the person will be as safe as 
possible at home .
Worksheet: Home Safety Checklist, on page 
59 of this guide, provides room-by-room 
suggestions to help you identify and remove 
hazards around the house . 
Are you worried that making changes might 
be expensive? You may be able to get help 
paying for repairs and safety updates to an 
older adult’s home . Check with your state 
housing finance agency, social services 
department, community development 
groups, or the federal government for 
financial aid programs and discounts. You 
can also contact the Eldercare Locator for 
help finding resources at
https://eldercare.acl.gov or by calling 
800-677-1116 .
What services are available for 
older adults living at home? 
Family members and friends may be 
able to help with some personal and 

C H A P T E R 2 : F I N D I N G T H E C A R E Y O U N E E D AT H O M E
household tasks . But you might want to hire 
professionals to assist with others . There 
are many types of services available to help 
meet a person’s long-term care needs when 
living at home . These include: 
Personal care. The most common type of 
long-term care is personal care . An older 
adult can get help with everyday activities, 
also called “activities of daily living,” 
including bathing, dressing, grooming, 
using the toilet, eating, and moving around 
— for example, getting out of bed and into a 
chair . To provide support for personal care, 
a relative, friend, or trained aide could help 
for a short time each day .
Household chores. Does the older 
adult need help with chores, such as 
housecleaning, yard work, grocery 
shopping, or laundry? Some grocery and 
drug stores will take orders over the phone 
or online and deliver the items to a person’s 
home, and someone you know may have a 
housekeeper or gardener to recommend . 
Laundry and dry-cleaning services that pick 
up and deliver clothes are another option . 
Meals. Maybe you’re worried that the person 
isn’t eating nutritious meals or is eating 
alone too often . You might suggest they 
share cooking duties with a friend or have 
a potluck dinner with a group of neighbors . 
Find out if their religious community or a 
local senior center serves meals . Is it hard 
for the person to get out? Plan to bring them 
a healthy meal a few times a week, ask a 
neighbor or friend to help out, or consider a 
meal delivery program . 
Money management. If the older adult 
needs help with tasks such as paying bills 
and filling out health insurance forms, you 
or a trusted relative could lend a hand . 
Trained volunteers, financial counselors, 
and other professionals can also help . 
Just make sure you get a referral from a 
trustworthy source, such as your local Area 
Agency on Aging . If the older adult uses a 
computer, you could help them pay their 
bills online through the websites of service 
providers or their bank . Some regular bills, 
such as utilities and rent or mortgage 
payments, can be paid automatically from a 
person’s bank account each month . 
Ask the person to consider providing 
someone they trust with legal permission to 
discuss their financial matters with others. 
One way to do this is through a power of 
attorney, which allows a trusted relative or 
friend to make financial decisions on their 
behalf . That person could help deal with 
creditors, pay bills from the older person’s 
bank account, or find out about Social 
Security or Medicare benefits. For more 
information, visit the Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau online at
www.consumerfinance.gov or call
855-411-2372 . 
Health care. In some areas, professionals 
can provide health care services in 
a person’s home — the modern-day 
equivalent of a house call . In-home services 
are available to help older people with 
many aspects of health care, including 
giving medications, caring for wounds, 
helping with medical equipment, and 
providing physical therapy . If the person 
just left the hospital and still needs nursing 
care at home for a short time, the hospital 
can help make arrangements for a home 
health aide . In-home health services can 
also help manage long-lasting (chronic) 
conditions such as diabetes, for example, 
by testing a person’s blood sugar or giving 
insulin through a pump . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Older adults are often the target of scams . Scammers are savvy and 
convincing, and their scams are designed to catch people off guard . 
Don’t be ashamed if you think you or someone you’re caring for has 
been a victim of a scam — it can happen to anyone.
Common scams aimed at older adults include:
• Government impersonator scams, such as someone posing as a Medicare 
representative asking for account information
• Fake prize, sweepstakes, and lottery scams, in which you are asked to pay 
money or provide account information to claim winnings
• Computer tech support scams, in which a scammer tells you that your 
computer has a problem and wants you to pay for support services to fix it
• The grandparent scam, in which a caller pretends to be a grandchild or other 
relative in distress
There are steps you can take to help protect yourself and your loved ones from 
scams . Remind your family and friends that they should not give out sensitive 
personal information over the phone or in response to an email, social media post, 
or text message . Sensitive information includes Social Security, bank account, and 
credit card numbers; PINs; and passwords . Always check incoming bills, including 
utility bills and credit card statements, for charges that were not authorized .
One reason that scammers target older adults is that they are less likely to report 
suspected fraud . If you think that an older adult in your life has been the target of a 
scam, contact the National Elder Fraud Hotline at 833–372–8311 .
Beware of Scams!
Does the older adult forget to take their 
medicines? You can set an alert on a 
smartphone or smart home speaker to 
remind someone when it is time for their 
next dose . Special pill boxes enable you to 
organize pills daily for an entire week .
Transportation. If the person has trouble 
walking, a cane or walker could help them 
get around more easily . If they need more 
assistance, think about getting an electric 
scooter or chair . If the person can no longer 
drive, neighbors or volunteers may be able 
to help take them to the doctor’s office or 
run errands, such as grocery shopping . 
There may also be free or low-cost public 
transportation, ride-sharing services, and 
taxis available in your area . 
Safety. If an older person lives alone, you 
might be concerned they will become sick, 
fall, or get lost when there’s no one around 
to help . Services such as an emergency 
medical alert system, fall monitor, or GPS 
tracking device can help lower these 
risks . These technologies alert emergency 

C H A P T E R 2 : F I N D I N G T H E C A R E Y O U N E E D AT H O M E
personnel when a person goes outside a 
specified area or needs urgent medical 
assistance . However, these devices must 
be set up correctly and worn by the older 
adult to be useful, and they can’t replace 
regular check-ins by family, friends, and 
other caregivers . 
Who provides care services for 
older adults living at home? 
There are many services that can help you 
care for an older adult at home . Trained 
professionals deliver different types of 
care, depending on the person’s specific 
needs and preferences . The most common 
services include: 
Home health care services. These are 
typically part-time medical services ordered 
by a physician for a specific condition. They 
may include in-home nursing care to help a 
person recover from surgery, an accident, 
or an illness . Home health care may also 
include physical, occupational, or speech 
therapy . The provider may come for a few 
hours each day or stay 24/7 .
What to know about costs:
• Home health services charge by the hour .
• Medicare has limited coverage of home 
health service costs . The services must 
be short-term and provided by agencies 
certified by Medicare. Medicaid also 
provides coverage for home health 
service costs, but these benefits vary
by state . 
• Most private health insurance plans do 
not cover these costs .
• You must pay all costs not covered by 
Medicare, Medicaid, or insurance .
To find a home health care service, ask your 
doctor or other health care professional 
about good options in your area . A tool for 
finding Medicare-certified home health 
agencies is available online at
www.medicare.gov/care-compare .
Geriatric care managers. A geriatric care 
manager, also called an aging life care 
expert, is usually a licensed nurse or social 
worker who specializes in geriatrics (health 
care for older adults) . This provider is a sort 
of “professional relative” who can help you 
identify needs and find ways to meet them — 
Looking for someone to help an older adult at home? The Eldercare 
Locator can help you learn which services are offered in your area . 
Visit https://eldercare.acl.gov or call 800-677-1116 to find Area 
Agencies on Aging and other resources in your community. 
Medicare (www.medicare.gov) and Medicaid (www.medicaid.gov) may cover the 
cost of some home-based services . Find out whether you are eligible and which 
benefits are available. Contact the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services at 
877-267-2323 .
Finding Resources for Home Care

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
both for you and the person receiving care . 
They can work with you both to make a care 
plan and find services in your community. 
Geriatric care managers can be especially 
helpful when a caregiver lives far away . They 
can also: 
• Discuss difficult topics and complex 
issues 
• Make home visits and suggest services 
• Address emotional concerns and provide 
support 
• Make short- and long-term plans 
• Evaluate in-home care needs 
• Coordinate medical services 
• Refer to other care specialists 
• Evaluate potential living arrangements 
• Provide stress relief to caregivers
What to know about costs:
• The cost of an initial evaluation varies 
and may be expensive .
• Geriatric care managers charge by
the hour .
• Medicare and Medicaid do not pay for 
this service .
• Most private health insurance plans 
don’t cover these costs . Long-term 
care insurance may pay for some of the 
costs: Check the plan to see if it includes 
coverage .
• Most people must pay for some or all of 
this service themselves .
There are several ways to locate a geriatric 
care manager . Your doctor or other health 
care provider may be able to provide a 
recommendation . Or contact the Aging Life 
Care Association at www.aginglifecare.org 
or 520-881-8008 . The Eldercare Locator 
can also help you find resources; visit 
https://eldercare.acl.gov or call
800-677-1116 . Additionally, you can contact 
a support group for diseases related 
to aging . These groups may be able to 
Home Health Care 
Services: Do Your 
Research!
Get as much information as you 
can about a service before you 
sign an agreement . It’s always a 
good idea to get a referral from a 
friend or trusted resource, and to 
check references before hiring a 
particular person or company . Ask 
home health care providers for 
references from people who have 
used their services . If possible, 
check for any complaints filed 
against a company. 
Medicare offers a tool to find 
and compare home health care 
providers in your state: Visit
www.medicare.gov/care-compare . 
You can also check with state 
and local agencies that regulate 
health services or contact the 
Better Business Bureau
(www.bbb.org) in your area .
See Worksheet: Questions To Ask 
Before Hiring a Care Provider, 
on page 61 of this guide, for 
considerations when choosing a 
home care service .
recommend geriatric care managers who 
have assisted others in your area .
 
Meal services. Meal services deliver 
healthy, nutritious meals to a person’s home 
on a daily or weekly basis . Many of these 
services offer options for special diets and 

C H A P T E R 2 : F I N D I N G T H E C A R E Y O U N E E D AT H O M E
can handle dietary restrictions . However, 
the delivery staff do not assist with making 
meals at home or feeding the person . 
What to know about costs:
•
In some cases, a person must qualify for
the service based on certain guidelines .
These can include age, mobility, and
economic need .
•
Medicare does not generally cover
meal delivery services, although under
certain circumstances, it will provide this
benefit for a short time. Medicaid may
pay for some meal delivery services if
the person is eligible .
•
Some meal delivery services do not
require payment . Others charge a fee or
accept donations .
To find a meal delivery service in your area, 
contact Meals on Wheels America at 
www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org or 
888-998-6325 . Some local governments 
provide low- or no-cost meals to older adults . 
Call or check their websites for details . Your 
health care provider or local senior center 
may also be able to recommend a service . 
Additionally, there are many subscription 
services that deliver ready-to-eat meals 
and meal kits . These can be arranged online 
and generally involve a regular weekly or 
monthly charge . For more resources in your 
community, visit the Eldercare Locator at 
https://eldercare.acl.gov or call 800-677-1116 . 
Adult day care services. Adult day care 
services can provide a much-needed break 
for caregivers at home . These programs 
provide a safe environment for older adults 
with trained staff in a nearby facility . An 
adult day care center may offer social 
activities, exercise, meals, personal care, 
and basic health care services . Some will 
provide transportation — the facility may 
pick up the person, take them to day care, 
and then return the person home .
What to know about costs: 
•
Adult day care tends to be less expensive
than in-home or nursing home care .
Charges can be hourly or by the day .
•
Medicare will not pay for adult day care,
but Medicaid and other government
programs may provide coverage .
•
Most private health insurance plans
don’t cover the costs of adult day care . 
Some long-term care insurance plans
pay a portion of the costs .
•
You must pay all costs not covered by a
government program or insurance .
To find an adult day care center in your 
area, contact the National Adult Day 
Services Association at www.nadsa.org 
or 877-745-1440 . For resources in your 
community, visit the Eldercare Locator at 
https://eldercare.acl.gov or call
800-677-1116 .
Respite care. Respite services provide 
short-term care for an older adult at home, 
in a health care facility, or at an adult day 
care center . The care may last anywhere 
from a few hours to several weeks at a time . 
These services provide regular caregivers 
with a break to rest, travel, or spend time 
with other family and friends . 
What to know about costs: 
•
Respite services charge by the hour or
by the number of days or weeks that
services are provided .
•
For a person receiving hospice care,
Medicare will cover most of the cost for
up to five consecutive days of respite
care in a hospital or skilled nursing
facility . Medicaid also may provide
payment assistance .

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
• Most private health insurance plans do 
not cover these costs . Some long-term 
care insurance plans may help pay for 
respite care . 
• You must pay all costs not covered by 
insurance or government programs . 
To search for respite care programs in your 
area, visit the ARCH National Respite Locator 
at https://archrespite.org/respitelocator 
or call 703-256-2084 . For more resources 
in your community, visit the Eldercare 
Locator at https://eldercare.acl.gov or call 
800-677-1116 .
Counseling from a mental health 
professional. Counselors can help older 
adults and caregivers deal with stress 
they may be feeling . They can help you 
understand your feelings, such as anger, 
sadness, or feeling out of control and 
overwhelmed . Counselors can also help 
develop plans for unexpected or
sudden events . 
Professionals who provide mental health 
counseling include psychologists, therapists, 
and social workers, among others . 
Counseling can occur in-person at an office, 
at a person’s home, or in a community 
setting . Virtual counseling sessions, which 
take place remotely on a computer or 
smartphone, are becoming more common . 
What to know about costs: 
• Professional mental health counselors 
charge by the hour . Rates vary widely . 
• Medicare or Medicaid may cover some of 
the costs . 
• Some private health insurance 
companies will cover some of the costs . 
• You must pay all costs not covered by 
Medicare, Medicaid, or private health 
insurance . 
Check with your health insurance provider 
to find out which counselors and services 
are in your plan’s network . Then ask your 
doctor, local family service agency, or 
community mental health agency for 
referrals to counselors who participate with 
your insurance plan . 
Friendly visitor and senior companion 
services. Some organizations have 
volunteers who regularly pay short visits 
(less than two hours) to older adults . The 
volunteer can provide support, assistance, 
and companionship . 
What to know about costs: 
• Volunteer services are available at no 
cost . You can also get this type of service 
from home health agencies for a fee . 
• Medicare, Medicaid, and private health 
insurance generally do not cover these 
services . Some long-term care insurance 
plans help pay for companion visits . 
The Eldercare Locator can help you 
find senior companion services in your 
community . Visit https://eldercare.acl.gov 
or call 800-677-1116 . Nearby senior centers 
and your state or local government can 
also help connect you with volunteers near 
where you live . 
Transportation services. When you 
aren’t available to take an older adult 
to the doctor’s office or grocery store, 
transportation services can help .
They drive people to and from medical 
appointments, shopping centers, and other 
places in the community . 
Various state and local agencies, nonprofit 
organizations, and companies offer 
transportation services for older adults . 
Some senior housing complexes and 
community groups also offer rides . Many 

C H A P T E R 2 : F I N D I N G T H E C A R E Y O U N E E D AT H O M E
public transit agencies have discounted 
fares and other services for older adults 
and people with disabilities . Many 
communities also have taxis, ride-sharing 
services, and other transportation resources 
available . If needed, you can request a 
vehicle that will accommodate a wheelchair, 
walker, or electric scooter . 
What to know about costs: 
• Some services are free . These include 
programs from state and local 
governments and some nonprofit 
organizations . 
• Other services, such as taxis, car 
services, and ride-sharing companies, 
charge a fee for transportation . Some 
offer discounts for older adults . 
• For people who do not have access to a 
ride, Medicaid provides transportation 
for emergency medical care and for 
doctor’s appointments . Medicare 
provides transportation via ambulance 
for health care emergencies and limited 
nonemergencies (such as a ride to a 
dialysis facility) . 
Learn more about transportation services 
available in your area from the Eldercare 
Locator . Visit https://eldercare.acl.gov or 
call 800-677-1116 . 
Emergency medical alert systems. These 
systems respond to medical and other 
emergencies via an electronic monitor 
that a person wears . The monitor alerts 
emergency personnel when a person 
becomes lost, falls, or needs urgent 
medical assistance . This type of service is 
especially useful for people who live alone 
or who have a high risk of falling . However, 
these devices won’t be useful in every kind 
of emergency . 
The user wears a necklace or bracelet with 
a button to call for emergency help . Some 
sensors can detect automatically when 
a person falls or travels away from their 
home unexpectedly, and the system will 
alert caregivers or emergency personnel . 
Make sure the devices are set up and worn 
correctly, and that batteries are charged or 
replaced as recommended . 
What to know about costs: 
• Emergency medical alert systems 
typically charge a fee to get started, 
followed by a monthly service fee . 
The costs vary based on the company, 
available features, and coverage area . 
• Medicare will not pay for emergency 
medical alert systems, but Medicaid and 
other programs may provide coverage . 
• Some private health care insurance 
plans cover emergency medical alert 
systems . Some long-term care insurance 
plans also pay a portion of the costs . 
• You must pay all costs not covered by 
private health insurance or government 
programs . 
The Eldercare Locator can help you find a 
service that’s right for you . Visit
https://eldercare.acl.gov or call 800-677-1116 . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Choosing a 
Long-Term 
Care Facility 
Chapter 3:
S
ometimes an older person can no 
longer live safely or comfortably in 
their own home . They may be able to 
move in with family or friends . Some people, 
however, need more help than a family 
member or friend can provide . They might 
move to a residential (live-in) facility, such 
as a board and care home, an assisted living 
facility, a nursing home, or a continuing care 
retirement community . 
“The goal is to come up with a plan 
that works for everyone, especially the 
older person.”
 
June lived in Phoenix with her children, while her 
father, Zhuang, lived alone in Los Angeles . She visited 
him several times each year . When she noticed that 
her dad was starting to have problems managing on 
his own, they sat down together to talk about their 
options . June’s job and family needed her in Phoenix, 
while Zhuang’s friends, doctors, and religious 
community were all in Los Angeles . June brought up 
the possibility of moving him to an assisted living 
facility close to his current home . There, Zhuang 
could get help when he needed it but still have the freedom to see his friends and 
go to the grocery store and to church .
June interviewed several facilities, and she and her dad toured one that seemed 
like a good fit. Zhuang said he could see himself living there. Within a month, they 
signed a contract . After Zhuang moved into assisted living, it took some time to 
adjust . He missed his old neighborhood and his former home . But he found that the 
facility had a weekly movie night, which he enjoyed, and computers he could use 
to email June and his grandchildren . Assisted living seemed like a good choice, and 
June was glad that he was getting the care he needed .

C H A P T E R 3 : C H O O S I N G A L O N G -T E R M C A R E FA C I L I T Y
How can I help an older adult 
decide if it’s time to move 
from their home? 
The decision about whether and when an 
older adult should move from their home is 
often difficult and emotional. Everyone will 
have their own reasons for wanting (or not 
wanting) to take such a step . One person 
may decide a move is right because they 
can’t or don’t want to manage the home any 
longer . For another person, the need for 
regular, hands-on care motivates a change . 
Making a decision that is best for the older 
person and their caregivers can be difficult. 
Try to learn as much as you can about the 
available housing options. These may include: 
• Moving to a smaller home, such as from 
a single-family home to a condominium 
or apartment
• Moving in with a family member or friend
• Moving to a residential facility, such as an 
assisted living facility or a nursing home 
The choices for where to live might be 
limited by factors such as illness, ability 
to perform activities of daily living (for 
example, eating, bathing, dressing, and 
using the toilet), and personal preferences . 
Money is often part of this decision as well . 
In some cases, a move frees up cash so that 
the older adult can afford a more suitable 
situation . For others, the desire to move to 
a safer location is hampered by a lack of 
funds to cover the cost of the new home . 
Some families and caregivers find that a 
meeting or conference call is a good way 
to talk through the pros and cons of each 
option . The goal is to come up with a plan 
that works for everyone, especially the 
older person .
To a long-distance caregiver, a move may 
provide a solution to the problem of not 
being close enough to help regularly . For 
some caregivers, moving an older person 
who needs help to their own home or 
community is an option . Others decide to 
have a family member move back to the 
older person’s local area to become the 
primary caregiver . Worksheet: Questions 
To Consider Before Moving an Older Adult 
Into Your Home, on page 63 of this guide, 
lists some questions to think about when 
considering this kind of move. 
Keep in mind that leaving a home, 
community, and familiar medical team can 
be disruptive and difficult, especially if the 
older person is not enthusiastic about the 
change. You might first want to explore 
what services are available in the person’s 
community to assist them in their home, 
including home health care, housekeeping, 
personal care, and transportation services . 
If a move becomes necessary, look for 
resources to help the person handle the 
transition . These may include counseling 
and support, guidance from health care 
professionals, and suggestions from your 
local senior center or Area Agency on Aging . 
What types of long-term care 
facilities are available? 
Some facilities offer only housing and 
housekeeping, but many also provide 
personal care, social and recreational 
activities, meals, and medical services . Some 
facilities offer special programs for people 
with Alzheimer’s disease and other types of 
dementia. Information about how to find and 
choose a facility is available on page 23 .

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
The most common types of long-term 
residential facilities are: 
Board and care homes. These small private 
facilities, also called residential care 
facilities or group homes, usually have 20 
or fewer residents . Rooms may be private or 
shared . Residents receive personal care and 
meals, and staff are available around the 
clock . Nursing and medical care usually are 
not provided at the home . 
In most cases, you must pay the costs of 
living at a board and care home . Medicare 
does not cover these costs . Medicaid 
may provide partial coverage, depending 
on the state and whether the person is 
eligible . If the older person has long-term 
care insurance, check their plan to see if it 
includes coverage for this type of facility. 
Assisted Living. Assisted living is for 
people who need help with daily care, 
but not as much help as a nursing home 
provides . Assisted living facilities range 
in size from as few as 25 residents to 100 
or more . Typically, a few levels of care are 
offered, and residents pay more if they 
need extra services or special care. 
Assisted living residents usually live in 
their own apartments or rooms and share 
common areas . They have access to many 
services, including up to three meals a day; 
assistance with personal care; help with 
medications, housekeeping, and laundry; 
24-hour supervision, security, and on-site 
staff; and social and recreational activities . 
Some assisted living facilities are part of 
a larger organization that also offers other 
levels of care . For example, continuing care 
retirement communities may also offer 
independent living and skilled nursing 
care . Exact arrangements vary by facility 
and by state. 
Most people pay the full costs of assisted 
living themselves . This option tends to be 
more expensive than living independently 
but less expensive than a nursing home . 
Medicare does not pay for assisted living . 
Medicaid may provide coverage for some 
aspects of assisted living depending on the 
state and whether the person is eligible . 
This care option is partially covered by some 
long-term care insurance policies. 
Nursing homes. Nursing homes, also called 
skilled nursing facilities, provide a wide 
range of health and personal care services . 
Their services focus more on medical 
care than most assisted living facilities or 
board and care homes . Services offered in 
a nursing home typically include nursing 
care, 24-hour supervision, three meals a 
day, and assistance with everyday activities . 
Rehabilitation services, such as physical, 
occupational, and speech therapy, are
also available .
In many cases, people must pay for nursing 
home care themselves . Medicare generally 
doesn’t cover long-term stays in a nursing 
home, but it may pay for some related 
costs, such as doctor services and medical 
supplies . Medicaid may also cover some of 
the costs of nursing homes for people who 
are eligible based on income and personal 
resources . If the older person has long-term 
care insurance, the policy may include some 
coverage for nursing home care . Check with 
the insurance company for details .
You can find and compare Medicare-
certified nursing homes in your state at 
www.medicare.gov/care-compare. 

C H A P T E R 3 : C H O O S I N G A L O N G -T E R M C A R E FA C I L I T Y
Continuing care retirement communities 
(CCRCs). These facilities, also called life care 
communities, offer different levels of service in
one location . Many of them offer independent 
housing (in houses or apartments), assisted 
living, and skilled nursing care all on 
one campus . Health care services and 
recreation programs are also provided. 
In a CCRC, where you live depends on the 
level of service you need . People who can 
no longer live independently move to the 
assisted living facility or sometimes receive 
home care in their independent living unit . 
If necessary, they can enter the CCRC’s 
nursing home .
Most CCRCs charge a one-time entrance 
fee, which may be relatively expensive, and 
a monthly fee after that . People must pay 
most of these costs themselves . Medicare, 
Medicaid, and long-term care insurance 
may cover some services, depending on the 
level of care provided. 
How can I find the right
long-term care facility for my 
loved one? 
Choosing a nursing home or assisted living 
facility is a big decision . It can be hard to 
know where to start . Follow these steps to 
find the right place:
Consider which services the person needs. 
How much support does the person need 
now, or might they need in the future? 
For example, do they need assistance 
with everyday activities, physical therapy, 
nursing care, hospice care, or a special 
unit for people with memory problems or 
dementia? To best understand their needs, 
it may be helpful to get permission to speak 
with the person’s health care provider. 
Also consider what the person wants. 
What features are important to the 
older adult, for example, meals, social 
and recreational activities, or a religious 
There are many sources of information about long-term care 
facilities . Visit LongTermCare.gov to learn more about long-term care 
options and find local services. You can also call your local Area Agency 
on Aging or department of human services from your state or local government . 
Search the Eldercare Locator at https://eldercare.acl.gov or call 800-677-1116
to find contacts in your area.
Medicare offers a tool to find and compare nursing homes and other health care 
facilities in your state: Visit www.medicare.gov/care-compare .
To check the quality of nursing homes and other health care facilities, visit the Joint 
Commission at www.qualitycheck.org .
Resources for Choosing a Long-Term 
Care Facility

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
connection? Do they want a place close to 
family and friends so they can easily visit? 
Talk to friends, family, and others in your 
area. Talk with friends and relatives who 
have had family members in long-term care 
facilities . Were they happy with the care 
they received? Social workers, religious 
groups, and support groups in your 
community may also be able to suggest the 
best quality places . Check with health care 
providers about which facilities they feel 
provide good care . 
Call different facilities. Once you’ve made 
a list of possibilities, get in touch with 
each facility on your list . Ask questions 
about how many people live there and 
what it costs . Mention any special needs 
or preferences . Find out whether there is 
immediate availability or a waiting list . 
Visit the facility. Before deciding, it’s 
a good idea to visit several facilities in 
person . Make plans to meet with the 
director, nursing director, or other key staff 
members . Visit www.medicare.gov and 
search for “Nursing Home Checklist” to 
download a form to fill out when visiting. 
For example, look for:
• Medicare and Medicaid certification 
• State licensing 
• Accessibility for people with disabilities 
• Residents who look appropriately 
dressed and well cared for 
• Warm and respectful interaction 
between staff and residents 
• A clean, fresh-smelling, comfortable, 
and well-maintained facility 
Don’t be afraid to ask questions during your 
visit . Ask about anything that is important 
or concerning . Here are a few ideas for 
questions to ask the staff: 
• How many care providers are there per 
resident? What kind of training do they 
have? How many of them are trained to 
provide medical care if needed? 
• How long have the director and heads 
of nursing, food, and social services 
departments worked at the facility? How 
often do key staff members turn over?
• Is there a doctor who checks on 
residents on a regular basis? How often? 
• What activities are planned for residents 
during the week and on weekends? Can 
you attend activities yourself to see 
what they’re like? 
• Is there a safe place for the older adult 
to go outside? 
• How will the person get to medical 
appointments? 
• If you need it, does the facility have a 
special unit for people with Alzheimer’s 
or another form of dementia? If so, what 
kinds of services does it provide? 
• Is there information on state regulations 
for how care is provided? For example, 
what happens when there is an infectious 
disease outbreak requiring quarantine? 
How do they ensure residents still get the 
physical activity and social interaction 
they need if they have to stay in their 
rooms for a long time?
Visit the facility again. Make a second visit 
without calling ahead . Try another day of the 
week or time of day so you will meet other 
staff members and have an opportunity 
to attend different activities . Stop by at 
mealtime . If there is a dining room, is it 
attractive and clean? Does the food look 
appetizing, and can you sample it?
Find out about costs of care. Each facility 
is different, so get detailed information 
about costs and which services are 
included . Find out if Medicare, Medicaid, or 

C H A P T E R 3 : C H O O S I N G A L O N G -T E R M C A R E FA C I L I T Y
long-term care insurance will pay for any of 
the costs. The facility may have a financial 
office that can help you determine what 
assistance is available .
Carefully read your contract. Once you 
select a facility, carefully read the contract . 
Make sure all the agreements are clear 
and ask questions about anything you don’t 
understand . Read over the contract again 
before signing it .
What should I do if I suspect 
an older adult is being 
mistreated? 
Mistreatment can happen anywhere: at home, 
a family member’s house, an assisted living 
facility, or a nursing home . Abuse can happen 
to any older adult, but it most often affects 
those who depend on others for help with 
activities of everyday life, such as bathing and 
dressing themselves . Older adults without 
family or friends nearby and people with 
disabilities, memory problems, or dementia 
may be more vulnerable to abuse .
Long-term care facilities must take steps 
to prevent (and report) abuse . Nursing 
homes and hospitals are subject to strict 
state licensing requirements and federal 
regulations . Still, neglect and abuse can 
occur . Physical abuse by another resident or 
someone who doesn’t work at the facility is 
also possible . 
It can be hard to assess the quality of an older 
adult’s caregivers . Perhaps you, a friend, 
Moving an older adult to an assisted living facility, group home, or 
nursing home can be stressful and is a big change for both the person 
and their caregivers . It may take some time for everyone to adjust . Here are 
some suggestions that can help: 
• Get to know the staff before the person moves into a facility . Talk with them 
about ways to make the transition go smoothly .
• Be an advocate for the needs and preferences of the older adult .
• Be supportive and listen to any concerns, but don’t argue with the older adult 
about why they need to be there .
• Share your feelings with a social worker or mental health professional . Feelings 
about moving an older adult into a new place may range from loss and guilt to a 
sense of relief . Get the support you need to help you and the older adult adjust . 
Once the person has moved to their new home, check in regularly to see how they 
are doing . Look for signs that the person may need more attention or may not be 
getting the care they need . Build a relationship with staff so that you work together 
as partners .
Making the Transition to a Long-Term
Care Facility 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
or a neighbor can stop by unannounced to 
see how things are going . Stay in touch with 
the older adult by phone and take note of 
any comments or mood changes that might 
indicate neglect or mistreatment . 
What are some signs of abuse? 
Abuse of older adults can be physical, 
emotional, sexual, or psychological . 
Mistreatment can also take the form 
of neglect, abandonment, or financial 
exploitation . An older person might be a 
victim of abuse if they: 
• Become withdrawn or act agitated
or violent 
• Display signs of trauma such as rocking 
back and forth 
• Have unexplained pressure marks, 
bruises, burns, cuts, or scars 
• Develop preventable conditions such as 
bedsores (open sores that can develop 
when a person stays in one position for a 
long time, such as being confined to a bed) 
• Have hazardous, unsafe, or unclean 
living conditions 
• Look messy, with unwashed hair or
dirty clothes 
• Lack personal health care items such as 
glasses, a walker, dentures, or hearing aid
• Have sudden and unexpected financial 
losses or unpaid bills despite adequate 
financial resources 
Watch for a pattern that might indicate a 
problem and seek help if you are concerned . 
If you suspect an older person is being abused, report what you 
see to an authority . Many older adults are too ashamed to report 
mistreatment . Or they’re afraid if they make a report, it will get back 
to the abuser and make the situation worse . Therefore, family and friends 
must step in to resolve any problems. 
Some types of mistreatment may be criminal . You do not personally need to prove 
that abuse is occurring; professionals will investigate . These resources can help: 
• Adult Protective Services programs help protect vulnerable adults from abuse, 
neglect, and exploitation . Phone numbers for these programs in each state are 
available at www.napsa-now.org/aps-program-list or by calling 202-370-6292. 
• The National Center on Elder Abuse provides guidance on how to report abuse, 
where to get help, and state laws that deal with abuse and neglect . Visit
https://ncea.acl.gov or call 855-500-3537 for more information .
• Long-term care ombudsmen advocate for the needs of people who live in 
assisted living facilities, board and care homes, and nursing homes . They are 
trained to help resolve problems. To find a long-term care ombudsman in your 
state, visit https://theconsumervoice.org/get_help or call 202-332-2275 .
If you think someone is in urgent danger, call 911.
Where To Get Help

C H A P T E R 4 : C O V E R I N G T H E C O S T S O F C A R E G I V I N G
Covering 
the Costs of 
Caregiving
Chapter 4:
M
any caregivers and older adults 
worry about the costs of long-
term care . These expenses can 
use up a significant part of monthly income, 
even for people who thought they had saved 
enough . How people pay for long-term care 
depends on their financial situation and the 
kinds of services they use .
Some people believe that their current 
health or disability insurance will pay for 
their long-term care needs, but most of 
these insurance policies include limited, if 
any, long-term care benefits. In most cases, 
people must find other means of paying for 
long-term care . They may rely on a variety of 
payment sources, including personal funds, 
federal and state government programs, and 
private financing options. Read on to find 
out more about each of these options .
How can personal funds be 
used to cover out-of-pocket 
expenses? 
Many older adults pay for part or all of long-
term care with their own money . They may 
 
Jim and Sally retired a few years ago . They recently 
decided they wanted to move into a continuing care 
retirement community closer to their kids . They had 
resources, including retirement income, money from 
selling their home, and long-term care insurance 
policies . But they weren’t sure which resources they 
should use to pay the costs of moving into their new 
apartment. They called their financial professional, 
who discussed the pros and cons of tapping into their 
different funding sources, including how it might 
affect their taxes . They also wanted to make sure there would still be money to 
leave their adult children as an inheritance . After talking through the options, Jim 
and Sally felt more confident about coming up with a plan for their next steps.

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
use personal savings, a pension or other 
retirement fund, income from investments, 
or proceeds from the sale of a home . 
Much home-based care is paid for by using 
personal “out of pocket” funds . Initially, family 
and friends often provide personal care and 
other services, such as transportation, for 
free . But as a person’s needs increase, paid 
services may be needed .
Many older adults also pay out of pocket for 
adult day care programs, meals, and other 
community-based services that help them 
remain in their homes . In some cases, these 
services are provided for free or at low cost 
by local governments and nonprofit groups. 
Professional care in assisted living facilities 
and continuing care retirement communities 
is almost always paid for out of pocket . In 
some states, Medicaid may cover some 
costs for people who are eligible . 
What government programs 
are available to help pay for 
long-term care?
Older adults may be eligible for some 
government health care benefits. 
Caregivers can help by learning more about 
possible sources of financial help and 
assisting older adults in applying for aid
as appropriate .
Several federal and state programs 
provide help with health care-related 
costs. Over time, the benefits and eligibility 
requirements of these programs can 
change, and some benefits differ from state 
to state . Check with the individual programs 
directly for the most recent information . 
Medicare. This federal government health 
insurance program helps pay some medical 
costs for people age 65 and older, and for 
people under 65 with certain disabilities 
and serious health conditions . Covered 
services include hospital stays, doctor visits, 
some home health care, hospice care, and 
preventive services such as vaccinations . 
The program does not cover assisted living 
or long-term care . The parts of Medicare 
include Part A (Hospital Insurance), Part 
B (Medical Insurance), and Part D (Drug 
Coverage) . Medicare also offers another 
way to get your Part A and Part B coverage 
through Medicare Advantage Plans .
Call Medicare at 800-633-4227 or visit 
www.medicare.gov for more information 
about its programs and coverage options . 
Medicaid. Some older adults qualify for 
Medicaid, a combined federal and state 
program for low-income people . This 
program covers the costs of medical 
care and some types of long-term care 
for people who have limited income and 
meet other eligibility requirements . Who 
is eligible and which services are covered 
vary from state to state .
To learn more, contact your state Medicaid 
agency or visit www.medicaid.gov .
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the 
Elderly (PACE). Some states offer PACE, the 
Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly . 
It is a combined Medicare and Medicaid 
program that provides services to people 
who otherwise would need care in a nursing 
home . PACE enables most people who 
qualify to continue living at home instead 
of moving to a long-term care facility . The 
program helps cover the costs of medical 
care, social services, and long-term care 

C H A P T E R 4 : C O V E R I N G T H E C O S T S O F C A R E G I V I N G
for frail older adults . Participants receive 
coordinated care from a team of health care 
professionals .
You will need to find out if the person who 
needs care qualifies for PACE and if there’s 
a PACE program near you . PACE is available 
only in certain states and in specific 
locations within those states . There may be 
a monthly charge .
To find out more, contact Medicare at
800-633-4227 or visit www.medicare.gov . 
You can also search for local programs by 
state or ZIP code through the National PACE 
Association at www.npaonline.org/pace-you .
State Health Insurance Assistance 
Program (SHIP). This national program 
has offices in each state. It provides one-
on-one counseling and assistance with 
Medicare, Medicaid, and related programs 
to individuals and caregivers . SHIP can
help navigate eligibility, coverage,
appeals, and out-of-pocket costs, and 
answer questions about your family’s 
unique situation and needs . 
To find contact information for SHIP in
your state, visit www.shiphelp.org or call
877-839-2675 .
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
The VA provides coverage for long-term care 
at a facility or at home for some veterans . 
If your family member or relative is eligible 
for veterans’ health care benefits, check with 
the VA or get in touch with the VA medical 
center nearest you . There could be a waiting 
list for VA nursing homes . 
Visit www.va.gov/geriatrics or call
877-222-8387 for information about
long-term care and other services for
older veterans . 
Social Security Disability Income (SSDI). 
Social Security is a program that provides 
financial benefits to retired people and to 
those with disabilities . SSDI is a type of 
Social Security for people with a medical 
condition that meets the Social Security 
Administration’s definition of “disability.” 
For a person to qualify for SSDI, they must 
be able to show that: 
• They worked in jobs covered by Social 
Security 
• They are unable to work 
• The condition will last at least a year or 
is expected to result in death 
Social Security has “compassionate 
allowances” to help people with early-onset 
Alzheimer’s, some other forms of dementia, 
and certain other serious medical conditions 
get disability benefits more quickly. 
For details about SSDI eligibility, benefits, 
and the application process, visit the Social 
Security Administration at www.ssa.gov or 
call 800-772-1213 . 
What are private financing 
options for long-term care?
In addition to personal funds and 
government programs, there are several 
private payment options, including long-
term care insurance, reverse mortgages, 
certain life insurance policies, annuities, 
and trusts . Which option is best depends on 
many factors, including the person’s age, 
health status, and financial situation. 
Long-Term Care Insurance: This type of 
insurance covers services and support for 
people needing long-term care, including 
help with the activities of daily living . 
Policies cover a wide range of benefits in a 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
variety of settings, including the person’s 
home, an assisted living facility, or a nursing 
home . The exact coverage depends on the 
type of policy and the services it includes . 
Make sure you understand what your policy 
does and does not cover, and how long 
benefits last. 
Many companies sell long-term care 
insurance. Costs and benefits vary, so it’s 
a good idea to shop around and compare 
policies . The cost of a policy is based on 
the type and amount of services, how old 
the person is when they buy the policy, 
and any optional benefits. Some employers 
are starting to offer group long-term care 
insurance programs as a benefit. It may 
be easier to qualify for long-term care 
insurance through an employer-sponsored 
program, and group rates may be cheaper 
than the cost of an individual policy .
Buying long-term care insurance can 
be a good choice for younger, relatively 
healthy people at low risk of needing long-
term care in the next 25 years . Costs go 
up for people who are older, have health 
problems, or want more benefits. Someone 
who is in poor health or already receiving 
end-of-life care services may not qualify 
for long-term care insurance .
For more information about long-term 
care insurance, visit your state’s insurance 
administration or LongTermCare.gov .
Reverse Mortgages. A reverse mortgage 
is a special type of home loan that lets a 
homeowner convert part of the ownership 
value in their home into cash without having 
to sell the home . Unlike a traditional home 
loan, no repayment is required until the 
borrower sells the home, no longer uses it 
as a main residence, or dies . 
There are no income or medical 
requirements to get a reverse mortgage, 
but this option is only available to those 
age 62 or older . The loan amount is tax-free 
and can be used for any expense, including 
long-term care . However, if the person has 
an existing mortgage or other debt against 
their home, they must use the funds to pay 
off those debts first. 
If you are thinking about a reverse mortgage, 
talk to an expert . A reverse mortgage can be 
complicated, and other borrowing options 
may be available . These might include a 
Finding Government 
Benefits
Do you wonder which benefit 
programs would be most helpful 
for you or a family member? 
Do you have questions about 
eligibility? Do you need to learn 
how to sign up? 
Benefits.gov is the federal 
government’s official benefits 
website . It offers numerous state 
and local resources for health 
care and financial assistance. The 
Benefit Finder questionnaire can 
help you find specific benefits 
and learn where to apply for them . 
You can also check out the 
National Council on Aging’s free 
service called BenefitsCheckUp 
(www.benefitscheckup.org) to 
find federal and state benefit 
programs for older adults . 

C H A P T E R 4 : C O V E R I N G T H E C O S T S O F C A R E G I V I N G
home equity loan or refinancing an existing 
mortgage to lower the monthly payments . 
Like a reverse mortgage, these options can 
free up cash for covering long-term care 
expenses . Additional information about 
reverse mortgages and other borrowing 
options is available from the Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau . Visit
www.consumerfinance.gov or call
855-411-2372 . 
Life Insurance Policies. Some life 
insurance policies can help pay for long-
term care . Companies are starting to offer a 
combination product that includes both life 
insurance and long-term care insurance . 
Policies with an “accelerated death benefit” 
provide tax-free cash advances while a 
person is still alive . The cash advance 
is subtracted from any proceeds that 
beneficiaries receive after the person 
dies . A person can get an accelerated 
death benefit if they live permanently in a 
nursing home, need long-term care for an 
extended time, are terminally ill, or have 
a life-threatening diagnosis . Check the 
life insurance policy to see exactly what 
it covers and when the older person can 
access the benefits. 
Selling a life insurance policy for its 
current value can be another way to 
raise cash . This option, known as a “life 
settlement,” is usually available only to 
women age 74 and older and men age 
70 and older . The proceeds are taxable 
and can be used for any reason, including 
paying for long-term care . 
A similar arrangement, called a “viatical 
settlement,” allows a terminally ill person 
to sell their life insurance policy to an 
insurance company for a percentage 
of the death benefit on the policy. This 
option is typically used by people who are 
expected to live two years or less . A viatical 
settlement provides immediate cash and is 
tax-free, but they can be difficult to obtain. 
Companies decline more than half of people 
who apply . 
Keep in mind that if a person chooses to 
take life insurance benefits early or to 
sell their policy, there will be little or no 
money left from the policy to pass on to 
heirs . For more information about using life 
insurance to pay for long-term care, visit 
your state’s insurance administration or 
LongTermCare.gov .
Annuities. An annuity is a contract with 
an insurance company that can help pay 
for long-term care services . In exchange 
for a lump sum contribution or series of 
contributions, the insurance company will 
provide regular payments over a specified 
period . For example, the annuity can provide 
monthly income to cover long-term care 
costs . These payments, however, may not be 
enough to cover all of a person’s expenses .
Annuities can have complicated effects 
on a person’s taxes, so speak with a 
tax professional before buying one . 
For more details about annuities, visit 
LongTermCare.gov .
Trusts. A trust is a legal arrangement that 
allows a person to transfer assets (such 
as cash, property, or insurance benefits) 
to another person, called the trustee . The 
trustee then manages the assets for that 
person’s benefit. A trust can provide flexible 
control of assets for an older adult or a 
person with a disability .
To find out more about the types of trusts 
that can be used to fund long-term care, 
visit LongTermCare.gov . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Can I get paid to take care of a 
family member? 
Family caregivers make a lot of sacrifices 
to care for older, sick, or disabled relatives . 
Some even quit their jobs to care for the 
person full-time . There are many costs 
involved in caregiving, for example, 
covering travel expenses, paying bills, and 
buying household essentials . These costs 
can add up to create a significant financial 
burden for caregivers . 
Many states offer some form of pay for 
family caregivers . But the laws, eligibility, 
and funding for this support vary by state . 
The most common source of assistance is 
Medicaid, which offers several state-based 
programs to people who are eligible based 
on income or disability . These programs 
include home and community-based 
services, adult foster care, and Medicaid 
personal care services . Contact your state 
Medicaid agency to learn more . 
Veterans and people living with certain 
diseases may also be eligible for financial 
assistance through federal and state 
agencies or private organizations . 
Information is available from the Eldercare 
Locator at https://eldercare.acl.gov or by 
calling 800-677-1116 .
Long-term care insurance usually provides 
coverage for care at home . However, 
policies differ regarding who can deliver 
that care . In some cases, only a professional 
service will be paid for long-term care . In 
other cases, the policy will pay for a family 
member to provide care . Contact your long-
term care insurer to find out the details of 
your policy .
Finding a Financial 
Professional
Navigating the details of paying 
for long-term care can be 
challenging . Some options can 
have implications for a person’s 
taxes and any inheritance they 
want to leave to their heirs . It 
may be useful to speak with a 
financial professional when you’re 
considering how to proceed . 
Helpful professionals may include: 
• Accountants 
• Financial planners 
• Investment advisors 
• Tax preparers 
• Attorneys
Check out Investor.gov for 
more information about finding, 
choosing, and working with a 
financial professional. 

C H A P T E R 5 : C O O R D I N AT I N G M E D I C A L C A R E
Coordinating 
Medical Care
Chapter 5:
I
f you are a caregiver for an older adult, 
you may be juggling many different 
aspects of their care . You might need 
to go with them to doctor’s appointments, 
look up information about an illness 
online, or help manage their medications . 
This chapter provides suggestions and 
resources that can help . 
How can I talk with an older 
adult’s health care providers? 
Many older adults find it helpful to bring a 
family member or friend with them to the 
doctor’s office. And working with health 
care professionals can be an important part 
of being a caregiver . 
First, you will need to make sure that 
the person’s health care providers have 
permission to speak with you . There are 
federal and state laws that protect a person’s 
“Working with health care 
professionals can be an important
part of being a caregiver.”
 
Jesse’s grandfather was diagnosed with dementia last 
year . When he could no longer manage his own health 
care, Jesse stepped in to help . After his diagnosis, 
Jesse’s grandfather started seeing several new health 
care providers and was given many new medications . 
There was a lot to keep track of . Jesse made sure he 
took his medications every day and scheduled his 
doctor’s appointments . But she was having trouble 
keeping up with the whirlwind of new information, 
prescriptions, and specialists .
Jesse shared her concerns with a friend who worked as a nurse . Her friend 
recommended smartphone apps that could help her keep her grandfather’s 
medications straight and set reminders to take them . Jesse also found out how to 
access his electronic health records online and make telehealth appointments with 
some of his doctors . Using these tools, Jesse felt that she had a better handle on 
managing her grandfather’s care .

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
private medical information . If the person 
would like their health care providers to share 
information with you, here’s what you can do: 
• If you go with the person to an 
appointment, they can tell the doctor 
verbally that they agree to have you 
there . The person can also tell the health 
care provider that it’s okay to share 
information with you later . 
• If you want to access a person’s medical 
records or speak with a provider when 
the person isn’t there, you will need to 
get legal permission . 
• Most doctor’s offices and hospitals 
have a consent form (sometimes called 
a HIPAA release or a HIPAA waiver) 
to specify who can have access to a 
person’s private medical information . 
Ask the older person to provide your 
name and contact information on this 
form at each provider’s office. 
• In some cases, it might make sense to 
get a medical power of attorney . This 
will enable you to access information 
and make health care decisions on 
the person’s behalf . Make sure all the 
person’s health care providers have a 
copy of the legal document . 
How can I be most helpful 
during a doctor’s visit? 
If you go with the person to see their doctor, 
here are a few tips that will help you be an 
ally and an advocate: 
Be prepared. Gather important information 
beforehand and take it with you to the 
appointment . 
• Take the person’s insurance cards, names 
and phone numbers of other doctors 
they see, and their medical records if 
the doctor doesn’t already have them . 
You may want to ask the doctor to send 
you all the forms the person will need to 
complete for their visit . 
• Bring a list with the names, dosage, 
and schedule of all medicines, vitamins, 
herbal remedies, over-the-counter 
drugs, and dietary supplements the 
older adult is taking . Don’t forget to 
include those prescribed by other 
doctors . To keep track, you can use the 
Worksheet: Managing Medications and 
Supplements on page 65 of this guide . 
• Make sure the person remembers to 
take their eyeglasses or contact lenses 
If you are worried the person might be depressed, you might want 
to discuss this with the doctor before the appointment . Depression 
is not a normal part of aging . Emotions such as sadness, grief, and 
temporary “blue” moods are normal, but continuing depression that 
interferes with daily living is not okay . 
Even some health professionals seem to think depression is a normal response to 
the illnesses and other problems that can happen as we grow older . Make sure the 
doctor is taking action in response to your concerns . 
Share Any Signs of Depression 

C H A P T E R 5 : C O O R D I N AT I N G M E D I C A L C A R E
to the doctor’s visit . If they have a 
hearing aid, make sure that it is working 
well and they’re wearing it . Tell the 
person to let the doctor and staff know if 
they have a hard time seeing or hearing . 
• If the doctor doesn’t speak the person’s 
language, ask the office staff to provide 
an interpreter. Call the doctor’s office 
ahead of time because they may need 
to plan for an interpreter from the 
same area or country to be available . 
Ensuring that the older adult can easily 
understand and talk with the interpreter 
is important for getting good care . 

Ask questions and take notes. This 
will help both you and the older person 
remember what the doctor said, and you 
can share the information with other 
caregivers later . 
• Before the appointment, ask the older 
adult and any other caregivers if they 
have any questions or concerns that they 
would like to bring up . 
• Bring the list of questions, starting with 
the most important ones, and take notes 
on what the doctor recommends . 
Be respectful. Remember that you’re there 
to support the older person and help them 
get the most out of their appointment .
• Ask the older adult in advance how you 
can be most helpful during the visit . 
Telehealth is a service that uses video calling and other technologies 
to help you see your doctor or other health care provider from home 
instead of at a doctor’s office or medical facility. Telehealth may be 
particularly helpful for people who have limited mobility or live in a rural area . 
Talking with your doctor online or through a smartphone, computer, or other electronic 
device can be easier, faster, and less expensive than making a trip to an office. 
Telehealth can also support family caregivers who are taking care of older adults 
either close by or from afar . If you need to ask the doctor a question, you can do so 
online rather than waiting for an in-person appointment . 
As a caregiver, you can help an older person prepare for a telehealth appointment by: 
• Finding a quiet space with good lighting
• Testing the camera and microphone on your device in advance 
• Making sure your device is fully charged and ready 
• Using a stable internet connection 
Medicare, Medicaid, and some private insurers are beginning to cover telehealth 
services . However, coverage can vary by your location and insurance plan . Check 
with your insurance company or your health care provider’s billing department for 
the latest information about coverage for telehealth services .
What Is Telehealth?

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
• When the doctor asks a question, let the 
older adult answer unless you have been 
asked to do so . 
• It’s easy to get into a two-way 
conversation between you and the 
doctor — try not to do this. Always 
include the person you care for when 
you talk with the doctor . 
• Respect the person’s privacy and leave the 
room when requested . The person may 
want a chance to ask questions or discuss 
sensitive topics privately with their doctor . 
As you may have discovered, not all health information on the 
internet is of equal quality. So how do you find websites that are 
accurate and reliable? Use the following questions to evaluate the 
health information you find online: 
• Who runs the website? In general, you’ll find good health information on 
websites run by a federal agency, medical school, hospital, or large professional 
or nonprofit organization. If the site is from another source, is it written by a 
health care professional, or does it reference one of these trustworthy sources 
for its health information?
• What’s the purpose of the site? Is the mission or goal of the website sponsor 
clear? Is it aimed at selling a product or service?
• Who authored the information? Is it clear who wrote the health information?
Is there a way to contact the sponsor of the website? 
• Is the information up to date? Pages should include dates when health 
information was written, reviewed, or updated . 
• Is your privacy protected? Look for a privacy policy section to see how your 
personal information will be used . 
• Does it sound too good to be true? Does the website offer overly simple or 
unrealistic solutions to challenging health problems? Are quick, miracle cures 
promised? Use common sense and good judgment .
When you find a website that seems to be trustworthy, don’t stop there. Check 
if other websites have similar health information . Discuss the information you 
find with a health care provider before you rely on it. You may have found good 
information, but only your provider can tell you whether it’s good for you or the 
older adult in your life . 
To get started, you can access reliable health information from government websites 
such as the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (www.nih.gov) and MedlinePlus.gov . 
A doctor, nurse, or other health care provider can also point you toward accurate, 
trustworthy resources online .
Finding Trustworthy Health Information Online

C H A P T E R 5 : C O O R D I N AT I N G M E D I C A L C A R E
Find resources and follow up. There are 
many ways you can be helpful after the 
appointment . 
• If you live out of town, talk to the doctor 
about how you can keep up to date on 
the older adult’s health . With the person’s 
permission, it might be helpful to get 
access to their electronic health records . 
• Ask the doctor for written materials to 
take home and see if they can recommend 
helpful community resources . 
• Larger medical practices, hospitals, 
and nursing homes often have a social 
worker on staff who may have valuable 
suggestions about online or community 
resources . 
• The National Institute on Aging (NIA) 
provides printable worksheets to track 
medications, organize questions and 
concerns, collect family and medical
history, and record information when
talking with the doctor . Search “Talking 
With Your Doctor Worksheets” online at
www.nia.nih.gov/health/twyd-worksheets . 
How can I help manage the 
person’s medications safely? 
Medicines can help us live longer, stay 
healthy, and treat many diseases and 
conditions . But taking them the wrong 
way or mixing certain prescription drugs, 
over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, and 
dietary supplements can be dangerous . 
The use of multiple drugs or more drugs 
than are medically necessary — called 
polypharmacy — is a growing concern 
for older adults . Some combinations of 
medicines and supplements make it more 
likely that a person will become confused 
or dizzy, fall and get hurt, or develop other 
health issues . Also, complicated regimens 
involving multiple drugs make it more likely 
that a person will miss doses or take the 
medicines incorrectly .
As a caregiver, you can help an older 
person keep track of their medicines 
and supplements and use them safely . 
Worksheet: Managing Medications and 
Supplements, on page 65 of this guide, 
offers a place to record the name, dose, and 
frequency of every prescription drug, OTC 
medicine, and supplement the person is 
taking . You can also note any concerns that 
you have . Keep this list handy for yourself 
and other caregivers, and share it with all of 
the person’s health care providers .
Here are some additional tips for managing 
a person’s medications: 
Stay Organized
• Create a file. Save all the written 
information that comes with the person’s 
medicines and keep it somewhere you 
and other caregivers can easily refer to it . 
• Give medicine on time. Use meals 
or bedtime as reminders to give the 
person their medicine . Or use charts, 
smartphone apps, or weekly pill boxes . 
You can also set timers and write 
reminders to give the medication . 
Focus On Safety 
• Keep medicines out of reach of young 
children. Make sure you don’t give the 
person medicines in front of young 
children, as they might try to copy you . 
Also, if the older adult’s medicines are 
kept in bottles without child safety
caps, be extra careful about where you 
store them . 
• Turn on a light. Don’t give medicine in 
the dark . Otherwise, you might make
a mistake . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
• Don’t share. Do not give the person 
medicines prescribed for someone else 
or give their prescription medicines to 
another person . 
• Check expiration dates on bottles. If a 
medicine is past its expiration date, you 
may be able to dispose of it at a pharmacy . 
You can also check with the person’s 
doctor about how to safely discard it . 
Follow instructions 
• Read all medicine labels. Make sure to 
give the older adult’s medicines the right 
way . For example, don’t use a combined 
cough and cold syrup if the person only 
has a runny nose with no cough . 
• Use the right amount. Don’t give the 
person a larger dose of a medicine, 
thinking it will help them more . Doing 
so can be very dangerous, even deadly . 
And don’t skip or give half doses of a 
prescription drug to save money . 
• Check before stopping. Give prescription 
medicine until it’s finished or until the 
person’s doctor says it’s all right to stop . 
Note that some medicines are supposed 
to be taken only “as needed .” 
• Take special care with prescription 
pain medicines. Pain medications can be 
helpful when used under a doctor’s care, 
but misusing certain types of prescription 
drugs increases the risk of dependence 
and addiction . Never take more of these 
medicines than the doctor prescribes . 
Learn more about using medicines safely 
from the NIH National Institute on Drug 
Abuse at https://nida.nih.gov . 
Watch for side effects 
• Write down any side effects so you can 
report them to the doctor accurately. 
Unwanted or unexpected symptoms or 
feelings that occur when a person takes 
medicine are called side effects . Call the 
doctor right away if the older adult has 
any problems with their medicines . 
• Call 911 if the person has life-threatening 
side effects from a medication. Rarely, 
drugs can cause serious side effects, 
such as severe bleeding or damage to the 
liver or kidneys . If you see any concerning 
changes, contact emergency services 
right away . 
Talk with health care providers 
• Report problems. Call the person’s 
doctor if you have any trouble with their 
prescription or OTC medicine, or if you 
are worried that it might be doing more 
harm than good . There may be another 
medication the person can take . 
• Tell the person’s doctor about alcohol, 
tobacco, and drug use. These substances 
can affect how well the person’s 
medicines work or lead to side effects 
when combined with certain medicines . 
Be honest with the doctor about how 
much the person uses . 
• Talk with the person’s health care 
providers before starting a new 
medicine. Make note of any special 
instructions for how to give the 
medicine . Find out whether the person 
will need to change or stop taking any 
of their other prescriptions or OTC drugs 
while using this new medicine . 
• Get help from a pharmacist. Try to have 
all of the person’s prescriptions filled at 
the same pharmacy to reduce the risk 
of taking medicines that will interact 
with each other . If you’re not able to use 
just one pharmacy, share your list of the 
person’s medicines at each pharmacy 
when you drop off their prescription . 
Remember that pharmacists can answer 
questions about over-the-counter 
medications, vitamins, and supplements 
as well as prescriptions . 

C H A P T E R 5 : C O O R D I N AT I N G M E D I C A L C A R E
Medicines can be costly . Even with private health insurance or 
Medicare, people may have to pay part of the costs for prescription 
medications themselves . If you are caring for an older adult with 
limited resources, help may be available . 
First, tell the person’s doctor if you’re worried about paying for medications . They 
may have suggestions or resources to share . Here are some other ideas that 
could help: 
• When available, consider switching to a generic drug or a less expensive brand-
name medicine . The doctor may be able to suggest an alternative that would 
work just as well .
• Shop around to find the best prices from neighborhood or legitimate online 
pharmacies . In some cases, ordering medications through a mail-order 
pharmacy costs less than using a retail pharmacy . 
• Pharmaceutical assistance programs can help with drug costs . Discount 
programs and other savings are offered by some retail pharmacies, drug 
companies, and nonprofit organizations. Visit www.medicare.gov and search for 
“Pharmaceutical Assistance Programs” or call 800-633-4227 to find programs 
that can help pay for specific drugs. 
• Some states also have drug assistance programs . Contact your State Health 
Insurance Assistance Program (SHIP) for more information. To find the SHIP in 
your state, visit www.shiphelp.org or call 877-839-2675 . 
• People with financial hardship who receive Medicare drug benefits may qualify 
for Medicare’s Extra Help program to help cover their costs . To apply, visit ssa.gov 
or call 800-772-1213 . 
Be careful if you’re thinking about buying prescription medications online to 
save money . Medicines from a fake online pharmacy can be ineffective, unsafe, 
or even dangerous . It’s important to order from a website that’s safe: Many are 
not, and it can be hard to determine which ones are reliable . Make sure that an 
online pharmacy requires a valid prescription, is licensed in your state, and has a 
pharmacist available to answer questions .
For more tips, visit FDA.gov (search “BeSafeRx”) or call 888-463-6332 .
Saving Money on Medicines

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Planning 
Ahead
Chapter 6:
I
f you are caring for an older adult, one 
way you can support them is to help 
get their health, legal, and financial 
affairs in order . (And yours too, while you’re 
at it!) You want to plan for the future as well 
as you can, preferably with their help while 
they can still make decisions . Work together 
to make sure their legal and financial 
paperwork is complete and reflects their 
wishes . You can also discuss what future 
health care they would want, including 
palliative care and hospice care, should they 
need it . For more information about advance 
care planning, visit https://order.nia.nih.gov 
to order or download more materials on
this topic . 
How can I talk with an older 
adult about their wishes for 
future medical care? 
For most of us, it’s hard to start a 
conversation about the kind of care a 
person would want if they became seriously 
ill or unable to make decisions on their own . 
The possibility of someone becoming ill or 
dying can be uncomfortable to talk about . It 
 
Nadia wanted to help her parents make plans for their 
future medical care, but she wasn’t sure how to start 
the conversation with them . What care would they 
want if they couldn’t make decisions for themselves? 
Who would make those decisions? Did they have a 
living will?
One weekend, Nadia sat down with her parents . She 
said, “Mom and Dad, I remember how hard it was for 
Tia Rosa’s family when she got so sick . The doctors 
asked them whether she would have wanted more treatment, but no one was sure 
of her wishes . I don’t want that to happen to us .” It was an emotional conversation, 
but it helped Nadia understand what her parents would want if they were in a 
similar situation . Nadia was relieved that they had opened the door to planning for 
her parents’ future care .

C H A P T E R 6 : P L A N N I N G A H E A D
can be especially difficult when the person 
is a parent or someone else close to you . Yet 
it’s important to be prepared, especially in 
case of unexpected illness or a medical
emergency . For some families, these 
honest conversations can also bring people 
closer together . 
Ideally, you’ll want to have this conversation 
face-to-face with the older adult . For most 
people, this subject is too sensitive for 
a text, email, or phone call . But different 
approaches will work best for different 
families . Once you can sit down with the 
older adult, here are a few ways you might 
start the conversation: 
• Ask directly whether they have 
considered what kind of medical care 
they would want if they could no longer 
make decisions for themselves . 
• Mention that you’ve been thinking
about plans and wishes for your own 
future care . 
• Bring up a friend’s or neighbor’s recent 
illness and how their family helped with 
future planning . 
• Ask if the person has talked with their 
doctor already about their preferences . 
• Discuss a recent TV show, newspaper 
article, or movie on the subject . 
Have a conversation about who would 
like to have the family’s antique dishes, 
for example, if you’re looking for a less 
direct way to start . 
When talking about plans for future 
medical care, assure the older adult that 
as long as they are able, they will be the 
one to make decisions . But by discussing 
their wishes now, you can make decisions 
in line with what they would want if it 
ever becomes necessary . Discussing 
these matters early may also help avoid 
some of the conflicts that can occur when 
family members disagree over treatment 
decisions . Making their wishes known 
increases the chances that an older adult 
will receive the care they want . 
Talking about an older adult’s wishes for 
future medical care will probably take 
more than one conversation . Once you’ve 
started the discussion, it usually gets easier . 
If you need help navigating this kind of 
talk, the person’s doctor, a mental health 
professional, a religious leader, or a close 
friend may be able to offer suggestions 
and support . You can also contact the 
Conversation Project at
https://theconversationproject.org or by 
calling 866-787-0831 for a free guide to 
starting the conversation . 
What is an advance directive 
and how can I help an older 
person set one up? 
Planning for future medical care is often 
done through an advance directive, a formal 
document that includes written instructions 
and preferences for a person’s future care . 
An advance directive goes into effect if the 
person can’t communicate their own wishes . 
The goal is to ensure that the family and 
doctors understand the person’s values, 
goals, and preferences, and could make 
decisions that reflect what they would want. 
There are typically three main types 
of advance directives that can be used 
separately or in combination to indicate a 
person’s wishes for their care:
A durable power of attorney for health 
care identifies someone — called a health 
care proxy or health care agent — to make 
decisions for a person if they are unable 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
to communicate their wishes themselves . 
The health care proxy can decide on care 
based on the person’s values and what they 
believe the person would want .
A living will indicates which common 
medical treatments or care a person would 
want if they had a life-threatening illness, 
which treatments they would want to avoid, 
and under which conditions each of their 
choices applies .
Physician orders for life-sustaining 
treatment (POLST) or medical orders for 
life sustaining treatment (MOLST) provide 
guidance about a person’s medical care 
preferences that health care professionals 
can act on immediately in an emergency . 
These may also be called portable medical 
orders or Physician Orders for Scope of 
Treatment (POST) . Typically, these orders 
are created when a person is near the 
end of life or is critically ill and knows the 
specific decisions that might need to be 
made on their behalf . 
Most people ask a close friend or family 
member to be their health care proxy . You 
can be a health care proxy even if you live 
far away . The role can be challenging: You 
may have to discuss sensitive topics, make 
difficult decisions, and advocate on the 
person’s behalf . If someone asks you to 
be their health care proxy, you can decide 
whether the role is right for you . There 
may be reasons that you choose not to 
be one . It’s okay to say “no” if you are not 
comfortable with the responsibility . 
Advance directives can be established for 
little or no cost . Many states have their own 
forms that you can access and complete for 
free. Here are some ways you can find free 
advance directive forms for your state: 
• Reach out to the Eldercare Locator .
You can call the Eldercare Locator at
800-677-1116 or visit
https://eldercare.acl.gov . 
• Contact your state’s department of aging 
or state attorney general’s office.
• Download your state’s form online from 
one of these national organizations: 
AARP (www.aarp.org), American Bar 
Association (www.americanbar.org), 
or National Hospice and Palliative Care 
Organization (www.nhpco.org) . 
• If you are a veteran, contact your local 
Veterans Affairs (VA) office. The VA offers 
an advance directive specifically for 
veterans . Visit www.va.gov/geriatrics
or call 877-222-8387 for information 
about future care planning and other 
services for older veterans . 
To make the plan official, most states 
require an advance directive to be 
witnessed . This means there are people 
who watch everyone sign the form . 
Some states require the signatures to be 
notarized . A notary is a person licensed by 
the state to witness signatures . You might 
find a notary at your bank, post office, 
shipping store, local library, or insurance 
agent’s office. Make sure you follow the 
requirements for your state to finalize 
advance directive documents . 
Share the completed advance directive 
with family members, other caregivers, 
and health care providers . Keep a copy 
at home as well . And remember, a person 
can change their wishes at any time . As 
a caregiver, you can remind the older 
person to review and update their advance 
planning documents as needed, and at
least once a year . 

C H A P T E R 6 : P L A N N I N G A H E A D
How can I help an older 
person get their important 
papers in order? 
One way you can help an older adult is 
to collect, organize, and maintain their 
important paperwork . Keeping a person’s 
information in order and up to date is a big 
part of effective caregiving . 
Getting these materials together can be 
a lot of work at first. But once you have 
everything, many other caregiving tasks will 
be easier . Maintaining current information 
about an older person’s health and medical 
care, as well as finances, home ownership, 
and other legal issues, lets you get a handle 
on what’s going on . And you’ll be thankful 
to have everything in one place to respond 
quickly if there’s a crisis . Worksheet: 
Important Documents and Paperwork, 
on page 67 of this guide, provides a 
checklist of records, documents, and other 
information to gather and store . 
Then follow these steps to get it all 
together: 
1 . Talk to the older adult about the kinds 
of records they have and where they 
are. Some of this information may 
already be together in a desk drawer or 
filing cabinet or on a computer, and that 
can be a good place to start . 
2 . Determine what paperwork or 
information is missing. You may need 
to contact the person’s financial advisor, 
bank, lawyer, or insurance company to 
get copies of important documents . 
3 . Put everything in one place. You can 
set up a file, put everything in a desk or 
dresser drawer, or list the information 
and location of papers in a notebook . If 
their papers are in a bank safe deposit 
box, keep copies in a file at home and 
make sure you know the location of the 
safe deposit box key . 
4 . Get rid of papers that are no longer 
needed. You may come across old 
receipts, bank statements, and other 
papers . Many of these documents can 
now be accessed online, so you don’t 
necessarily need to keep the paper 
versions . Check with your tax preparer 
or other financial professional if you 
aren’t sure how long you need to keep 
important documents . 
5 . Have the person give permission for 
their doctor, bank, or lawyer to talk 
with you. There may be questions 
about their medical care, a bill, or a 
health insurance claim . Without their 
consent, you may not be able to get that 
information . The person can give their 
okay in advance to Medicare, a credit 
card company, their bank, or their doctor . 
Find out whether they can agree verbally 
or if they need to sign and return a form . 
6 . Save login information for online 
records. Write down usernames, 
passwords, PINs, and other information 
needed to access online accounts and 
records . Keep the information in a safe 
place . Passwords can also be saved in a 
password management app . 
7 . Check to see if there's anything new 
to add. Put new documents in the 
file as soon as they arrive and update 
login information for online records 
as needed . Review everything at least 
once a year . 
One visit may not be enough time for you to 
get all the paperwork organized . If there’s 
a lot to find and update, don’t try to do it 
all at once . Instead, focus on gathering the 
essentials first — you can fill in the blanks 
as you go along . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
How can I help an older adult 
plan for the end of life? 
When thinking about the end of life, there 
are many issues to consider and decisions 
to make . The end of life will look different 
depending on a person’s preferences, 
needs, and choices . Some people may want 
to be at home when they die, while others 
may prefer to seek treatment in a hospital 
or facility until the very end . Palliative 
care, which can be used along with other 
medical treatments throughout the course 
of an illness, or hospice care, which is 
available in the final months of life, may 
also be options . These types of care focus 
on a person’s comfort and quality of life 
and support for the family and caregivers . 
One of the best things you can do as a 
caregiver is to discuss end-of-life care 
with the older person in advance . Make 
sure their wishes are known to any other 
caregivers, family, or friends who might 
make decisions on their behalf . Also 
encourage the older person to discuss 
their end-of-life preferences with their 
doctor . The doctor can explain which 
health decisions the older adult may need 
to make in the future and the treatment 
options available . Discussing advance care 
planning decisions with a doctor is covered 
by Medicare during an annual wellness visit 
and at other times as needed . Private health 
insurance may also cover these discussions . 
To make their wishes clear, the person 
may need to state their preferences in a 
living will and have doctor’s orders (special 
forms that the person completes with 
their doctor) . Doctor’s orders in a person’s 
medical chart make it much more likely 
that their wishes will be carried out, even in 
emergency situations . Here are examples of 
doctor’s orders: 
Do not resuscitate (DNR) order tells health 
care staff not to try to return the heart to
a normal rhythm or attempt other
life-support procedures in case the heart
or breathing stops . 
 
If an older adult is considering a legal arrangement such as a power 
of attorney, a joint bank account, a trust, or an advance directive, 
they may want to talk with a lawyer first. A lawyer may not be 
required to set up these arrangements, but they can provide guidance and 
advice if you need it . 
You can find a directory of lawyers on the internet or at your public library, or you 
can contact your local bar association for the names of lawyers in your area . Be 
sure to ask about the lawyer’s fees before you make an appointment . Your local 
bar association or state legal aid office can help you find out what free or low-cost 
options your state has to offer . Visit www.usa.gov/legal-aid for additional resources . 
Finding Legal Help

C H A P T E R 6 : P L A N N I N G A H E A D
Do not intubate (DNI) order lets medical 
staff in a hospital or nursing facility 
know that you do not want to be put on a 
ventilator to breathe for you . 
Do not hospitalize (DNH) order indicates to 
long-term care providers, such as nursing 
home staff, that you prefer not to be sent to 
a hospital for treatment at the end of life . 
Physician orders for life-sustaining 
treatment (POLST) or medical orders 
for life sustaining treatment (MOLST), 
described on page 42, provide guidance 
about your medical care preferences 
that health care professionals can act on 
immediately in an emergency . 
As you are considering advanced care 
planning with an older person, other end-of-
life decisions that may come up include: 
Organ and tissue donation. In some cases, 
healthy organs and tissues from someone 
who has died can be transplanted into living 
people who need them . People of any age 
can be organ donors . Some states will add 
a person’s organ donation status to their 
driver’s license, or they can carry a donor 
card in their wallet . Encourage the older 
person to state their wishes about organ 
donation in their advance care directive . 
Sign up to become an organ donor by 
visiting www.organdonor.gov or by visiting 
your state motor vehicle office. 
Brain donation. Donating a brain 
contributes to scientific research, helping 
scientists discover new treatments and 
preventions for disease . Registering as 
a brain donor is a separate process from 
becoming an organ and tissue donor . People 
who are interested in brain donation should 
consider enrolling in a research study or 
brain donation program . Visit Brain Donation: 
A Gift for Future Generations at
www.nia.nih.gov/braindonation or the Brain 
Donor Project at braindonorproject.org to 
learn more about brain donation . 
Having a care plan in place at the end of 
life is important to ensure that the person’s 
wishes are respected as much as possible . 
A care plan summarizes a person’s health 
conditions, medications, health care 
providers, emergency contacts, and end-of-
life care wishes, such as advance directives 
and doctor’s orders . A care plan may also 
include the person’s wishes for what 
happens after they die, such as
organ donation and funeral or memorial 
service arrangements . 
What are palliative care and 
hospice care? 
There are many factors to consider when 
choosing care at the end of life, including 
the older person’s desire to pursue life-
extending treatments, how long they have 
left to live, and the preferred setting for 
care . Palliative care or hospice care may 
provide the support and treatment the 
older person would want . Talk to the person 
about their wishes during advance care 
planning . Learning about the available 
options can help you be prepared . 
Palliative care is medical care that focuses 
on relieving the symptoms of serious 
illnesses, such as cancer, dementia, or 
heart failure . Patients work with a medical 
care team and continue to receive all other 
appropriate treatments for their illness . 
Palliative care can be helpful at any stage of 
a serious illness, from the time of diagnosis 
to the end of life . Palliative care is meant to 
enhance a person’s current care by focusing 
on quality of life for them and their family . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Palliative care can be provided in hospitals, 
nursing homes, outpatient palliative care 
clinics and certain other specialized clinics, 
or at home . Most private health insurance 
plans cover palliative care services, at 
least in part . Medicare and Medicaid also 
typically cover most of these services . 
Veterans may be eligible for palliative care 
through the Department of Veterans Affairs . 
If you have concerns about paying for 
palliative care, a social worker, a geriatric 
care manager, or the financial office at your 
hospital or clinic may be able to help you . 
Hospice care focuses on the care, comfort, 
and quality of life of a person approaching 
the end of life . At some point, it may not 
be possible to cure a serious illness, or a 
patient may choose not to undergo further 
treatments intended to prolong life . Hospice 
care is available when a doctor believes the 
person has limited time to live if the illness 
runs its natural course, typically six months 
or less . Like palliative care, hospice provides 
comfort care as well as support for the 
family . But in hospice care, attempts to cure 
the person’s illness are stopped . 
Hospice care can be offered at home 
or in a facility such as a nursing home, 
hospital, or a dedicated hospice center . 
Many hospice care services are covered 
by Medicare, Medicaid, and private health 
insurance . In most cases, the person or their 
representative will need to sign a statement 
choosing hospice care instead of other 
covered treatments for their illness . 
For more information about palliative care, 
hospice care, and end-of-life decisions, visit 
www.nia.nih.gov or call the NIA Information 
Center at 800-222-2225 . You can also 
contact the National Hospice and Palliative 
Care Organization at www.caringinfo.org
or 800-658-8898 .

C H A P T E R 7 : C A R I N G F O R Y O U R S E L F A S A C A R E G I V E R
Caring for 
Yourself as a 
Caregiver 
Chapter 7:
C
aregiving is not easy — not for the 
caregiver and not for the person 
receiving care . It comes with 
sacrifices and adjustments for everyone. 
Taking care of an older adult can be 
demanding, difficult, and stressful. Often, 
family caregivers must juggle work and 
family life to make time for these new 
responsibilities . 
Caring for an older adult can also be 
rewarding. Many people find that caregiving 
provides a sense of fulfillment and that they 
like feeling useful and needed . Caregivers 
who reach out to others for support often 
make new friends and deepen their existing 
relationships . Some caregivers learn more 
about themselves and find more meaning in 
life through the experience . 
Despite these benefits, the emotional and 
physical stress of caregiving can take its 
toll . The ongoing demands of taking care 
of someone else can strain even the most 
 
Caring for teenagers and two sets of older parents 
felt like a full-time job to Lee and Andy — and that 
was on top of their full-time careers . They loved their 
family but felt a little overwhelmed by all the sports 
practices, doctor’s appointments, and trips to the 
grocery store . Taking care of themselves was the last 
thing on their minds . But when they realized that they 
hadn’t had a day off in more than a year, they knew 
that they needed to take a break . Lee and Andy found 
people to help them so they could go away for a long 
weekend . When they returned, they set up regular assistance with volunteers who 
could visit their parents weekly, a carpool for sports games, and a grocery delivery 
service . Creating some breathing room in their schedules helped them be better 
caregivers to the people who needed them .

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
resilient person . Too much stress, especially 
over a long time, can harm your health and 
relationships . That’s why it’s so important 
for you to take care of yourself . This chapter 
will give you some ideas for ways to look 
out for your own well-being so you can be 
there for others . 
As a caregiver, how do I know 
if I need help? 
Caregivers do a lot for others . Because there 
is so much on their plate, many caregivers 
don’t spend time taking care of themselves . 
For example, they are less likely than others 
to get preventive health services, like annual 
check-ups, and to practice regular self-care . 
As a result, they tend to have a higher risk 
of physical and mental health issues, sleep 
problems, and chronic conditions such as 
high blood pressure . They are even at an 
increased risk of premature death . 
It’s not always obvious when a person 
needs help . It may seem like certain 
problems are unavoidable or a normal part 
of caregiving . But there are ways to make 
things better . Watch out for these signs of 
caregiver stress: 
• Feeling exhausted, overwhelmed, or 
anxious 
• Becoming easily angered or impatient 
• Feeling lonely or disconnected from others 
• Having trouble sleeping or not getting 
enough sleep 
• Feeling sad or hopeless, or losing 
interest in activities you used to enjoy 
• Having frequent headaches, pain, or 
other physical problems 
• Not having enough time to exercise or 
prepare healthy food for yourself 
• Skipping showers or other personal care 
tasks such as brushing your teeth 
• Misusing alcohol or drugs, including 
prescription medications 
Identify your own sources of stress . Ask 
yourself, “What part of this is hardest for me?” 
It might initially feel like it’s all too difficult, 
but you may be able to pinpoint certain tasks 
that are causing you the most stress . Don’t 
wait until you are completely overwhelmed: 
Learn what your own warning signs are and 
think about changes you could make . 
Long-distance caregiving brings its own 
kinds of stress . Sometimes, long-distance 
caregivers feel guilty about not being 
closer, not doing enough, or not having 
enough time with the person . They may 
even feel jealous of those who live closer 
and can do more . Many long-distance 
caregivers also worry about taking time 
off from work, being away from family, 
and paying for travel . Even though they’re 
far away and might not have the same 
stressors as a primary caregiver, long-
distance caregivers should be aware of 
when they may need help, too . 
How can I ask others to help?
When people have asked you if they can 
lend a hand, have you told them, “Thanks, 
but I’m fine”? Accepting help from 
others isn’t always easy . You may worry 
about being a burden, or you may feel 
uncomfortable admitting that you can’t do 
it all yourself . But many caregivers later say 
they did too much on their own, and they 
wished they had asked for more support 
from family and friends . 
Understand that many people want to help, 
and it makes them feel good to contribute . 
But if you hesitate to ask others for 
assistance, here are some ideas:

C H A P T E R 7 : C A R I N G F O R Y O U R S E L F A S A C A R E G I V E R
• Ask for small things at first, if that 
makes it easier for you . Many large jobs 
can be broken down into simpler tasks . 
• If you aren’t comfortable asking face-
to-face, send a text or email with your 
request . 
• Consider a person’s skills and interests 
when thinking about how they could help . 
• Be prepared with a list of things that 
need to be done, and let the other 
person choose what they’d like to do . 
Worksheet: Coordinating Caregiving, on 
page 55 of this guide, provides a list 
of caregiving activities that you could 
divide up with others . 
• If someone offers to help, practice 
saying, “Thanks for asking . Here’s what 
you can do .” 
• Be honest about what you need and 
what you don’t need . Not every offer is 
going to be helpful . 
• Be prepared for some people to say “no,” 
and don’t take it personally .
What else can I do if I’m 
feeling overwhelmed? 
If you’re feeling overwhelmed by 
caregiving, tending to your own needs may 
be the last thing on your mind . But taking 
time for yourself can actually make you a 
better caregiver. If you can find small ways 
to lower your stress and boost your mood, 
you’ll have more strength and stamina to 
take care of someone else . 
This list provides some activities you can 
try . If you only have a few minutes every 
day, start with one or two . You don’t have to 
do everything all at once, especially if the 
thought of self-care just makes you feel 
more exhausted . 
 
Be active. Even short periods of exercise 
can be beneficial. Find something active 
that you enjoy . That might be walking, 
dancing, gardening, or playing with a pet . 
Eat well. Work on having a well-balanced 
diet that includes a variety of healthy foods . 
Drink plenty of water every day . 
Prioritize sleep. Aim to get 7 to 9 hours 
of sleep each night . Develop a relaxing 
bedtime routine to make it easier to fall 
asleep . Try to go to asleep and get up at the 
same time each day . 
Reduce stress. Experiment with relaxation 
techniques like meditation, tai chi, or yoga . 
Download a smartphone app with guided 
meditations or relaxing music . Many of 
these apps are free . 
Make time to relax. Carve out time each 
week to do something you enjoy that has 
nothing to do with caregiving . It can be 
as simple as watching a favorite TV show, 
reading a magazine, or working on a hobby . 
Keep up with your own health. Make that 
doctor’s appointment you’ve been putting 
off . Tell your doctor that you’re a caregiver: 
They may be able to suggest resources 
online or in your community . 
Reach out for support. Talk to a trusted 
family member or friend, or seek counseling 
from a mental health professional . Join 
an online or in-person support group for 
caregivers . These are people who will know 
what you’re going through and may have 
suggestions or advice . 
Take a break if you need it. Ask another 
family member or friend to step in, hire an 
aide to come for a few hours a week, or 
sign up the older person for an adult day 
care program . 

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Be kind to yourself. You don’t have 
to pretend to be cheerful all the time . 
Feelings of sadness, frustration, and guilt 
are normal and understandable . Express 
your feelings by writing in a journal or 
talking with a friend . 
Remember that you are doing the best 
you can and that you are not alone . Many 
caregivers have trouble tending to their 
own health and well-being . But give 
yourself credit for everything you’re doing . 
Your caregiving makes a big difference in 
someone else’s life . 
If I’m not the primary 
caregiver, how can I support 
that person? 
In many cases, one person takes on most 
of the everyday responsibilities of caring 
for an older person . It tends to be a spouse 
or the child or sibling who lives closest . If 
you are not the primary caregiver, you can 
still play an important role in supporting 
that person . Be sure to acknowledge 
how important the primary caregiver is in 
the older person’s life . Also, discuss the 
physical and emotional effects caregiving 
can have on people . Although caregiving 
can be satisfying, it also can be very
hard work . 
You can lighten the primary caregiver’s 
load by providing emotional support, taking 
on specific tasks, and giving occasional 
respite care . Ask them what you can do that 
would be most helpful . Staying in contact 
by phone or email might also take some 
pressure off the primary caregiver . Just 
listening may not sound like much, but it 
can mean a lot . 
A primary caregiver — especially a spouse — 
may be hesitant to ask for a break . Here are 
some ways you could help them get the rest 
they need: 
• Offer to stay with the older person for 
one afternoon a week, for example, so 
the primary caregiver can have some 
personal time . 
• Arrange for regular respite care in the 
form of a volunteer, an in-home aide, or 
an adult day care program . 
• If you live far away, travel to stay with 
the older person for a few days so the 
primary caregiver can take a vacation or 
just have some time off . 
In time, the older person may have to move 
to assisted living or a nursing home . If that 
happens, the primary caregiver will need 
your support . You can work together to 
select a facility and coordinate the move . 
The primary caregiver may need extra 
support while adjusting to the person’s 
absence and to living alone at home . More 
information about transitioning to a long-
term care facility can be found in Chapter 3 
of this guide on page 20 .
“Many caregivers have trouble tending 
to their own health and well-being. 
But give yourself credit for everything 
you’re doing. Your caregiving makes a 
big difference in someone else’s life.”

C H A P T E R 7 : C A R I N G F O R Y O U R S E L F A S A C A R E G I V E R
These organizations provide free support, guidance, and assistance 
to caregivers . 
• The ARCH National Respite Network and Resource Center
(https://archrespite.org/respitelocator or 703-256-2084) provides options for 
respite care and can suggest services in your community . Their Respite Locator 
enables you to search for local respite resources, including state-sponsored 
programs, adult day care centers, and services for veterans . 
• The Eldercare Locator (eldercare.acl.gov or 800-677-1116) connects older 
adults and their caregivers with state and local agencies on aging, as well as 
community-based organizations . 
• The Family Caregiver Alliance (www.caregiver.org/connecting-caregivers or 
800-445-8106) offers in-person, online, and email-based support groups for 
people providing care for adults with serious health conditions . 
• The Caregiver Action Network (CAN) (www.caregiveraction.org or
202-454-3970) has an online forum for caregivers to connect with one another . 
The CAN Story Project offers family caregivers a platform to both share their 
stories and to read about other families’ caregiving experiences . 
• AARP (www.aarp.org/caregiving/life-balance or 877-333-5885) offers 
articles for caregivers on self-care, dealing with stress, work-life balance, and 
finding support. 
Here are more places for caregivers to access help and support: 
• Your doctor. Tell your doctor that you are a caregiver . They can give you advice 
about taking care of your physical and mental health . Health care professionals 
may also know about support groups, respite care, and other resources offered 
in your community . 
• A counselor or other mental health professional. If you are feeling anxious, 
frustrated, or depressed, help is available . Ask your doctor for referrals to 
counselors, and check with your health insurance provider to find out about 
your plan’s coverage . 
• Your local senior center, state office on aging or social services office, or local 
Area Agency on Aging. These organizations will be familiar with resources 
available in your community and may have tips for accessing them . 
• Your faith community. Larger congregations may host support groups for 
caregivers . You can also ask for guidance from your pastor, rabbi, or other 
religious leader . 
Caregiver Support Resources

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
Caregiving can be challenging and 
time-consuming, but it can also be very 
rewarding and meaningful . We hope this 
guide helps you and the older adult you are 
caring for . 
Here are some main points to remember: 
• Learn as much as you can about the 
older adult’s health issues and care 
needs and desires so you can cope with 
challenges and manage their care more 
effectively . 
• Identify people who can help with 
caregiving — for example, family 
members, friends, or neighbors — 
and define caregiving roles and 
responsibilities . 
• Make sure the person’s home is safe, 
accessible, and meets their needs . Get 
help, such as an in-home aide or a meal 
delivery service, if needed . 
• If the older person can no longer live 
at home, explore options for long-term 
care . These might include assisted living, 
a nursing home, or a continuing care 
retirement community . 
• Establish good communication with 
health care providers to help ensure the 
best care for the older adult .

• Find out about resources from 
government programs, insurance, and 
other sources to help cover the costs of 
caregiving . 
• Talk with the older adult about their 
wishes for future medical care and help 
them set up advance directives . 
• Organize important information so you 
know where it is when you need it . 
• Ask for help . No one can be expected to 
do everything by themselves . Talk with 
others who are involved in caregiving to 
get their suggestions and support . 
As the older person’s needs change, so will 
your role as a caregiver . You can refer back 
to this guide for ideas and resources to 
help you along the way . We hope that it will 
help you stay organized, have productive 
conversations, and take good care of 
yourself and your loved ones . 
Summary 

F O R M O R E I N F O R M AT I O N
National Institute on Aging (NIA) 
Information Center 
800-222-2225 (English and Spanish) 
niaic@nia.nih.gov
www.nia.nih.gov/health 
The NIA Information Center offers 
information and publications on health and 
aging for families, caregivers, and health 
professionals . 
Eldercare Locator
800-677-1116 
eldercarelocator@USAging.org 
https://eldercare.acl.gov
The Eldercare Locator is a nationwide 
service from the U .S . Administration 
on Aging and U .S . Administration for 
Community Living that connects older 
Americans and their caregivers with 
trustworthy local support resources . 
LongTermCare.gov 
800-677-1116 
https://acl.gov/ltc
LongTermCare .gov is a resource from 
the U .S . Administration on Aging and U .S . 
Administration for Community Living . It 
provides basic information about long-term 
care, costs and insurance coverage, and 
help finding local services. 
Medicare.gov 
800-633-4227 
www.medicare.gov 
Medicare is health insurance for people 65 
or older and those with certain disabilities 
and serious illnesses . Its Care Compare tool 
(www.medicare.gov/care-compare) can 
help you find Medicare-certified providers 
and services in your area . 
Medicaid.gov 
877-267-2323 
www.medicaid.gov
Medicaid provides health coverage to 
millions of Americans, including eligible 
low-income adults, children, pregnant 
people, elderly adults, and people with 
disabilities . Its website provides information 
about eligibility, benefits, and how to find 
your state program . 
Social Security Administration
800-772-1213
www.ssa.gov
The Social Security Administration website 
provides information about retirement and 
disability benefits, ways to sign up, benefit 
statements, and account access .
For More Information

T H E C A R E G I V E R ’ S H A N D B O O K
AARP 
888-687-2277 
www.aarp.org/home-family/caregiving
AARP offers health and lifestyle information 
for people age 50 and older, as well as 
articles, guides, and interactive resources 
for people providing care to older adults . 
You can search the AARP website for 
printable advance directive forms for
your state . 
ARCH National Respite Network and 
Resource Center 
703-256-2084 
www.archrespite.org
The ARCH National Respite Network and 
Resource Center provides information and 
resources related to respite care . It also 
has a National Respite Locator feature
(https://archrespite.org/respitelocator) 
to help you find respite services and 
programs in your area . 
Caregiver Action Network 
202-454-3970 
info@caregiveraction.org
www.caregiveraction.org
The Caregiver Action Network provides 
support, information, and resources to 
family caregivers . 
Family Caregiver Alliance 
800-445-8106 
info@caregiver.org 
www.caregiver.org 
The Family Caregiver Alliance provides 
information, resources, and support to 
family caregivers of adults with physical 
and cognitive impairments, such as 
Parkinson’s disease, stroke, Alzheimer’s 
disease, and other types of dementia . They 
also provide a searchable list of caregiver 
services by state . 
Meals on Wheels America 
888-998-6325 
info@mealsonwheelsamerica.org 
www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org 
Meals on Wheels America supports local 
programs across the United States that 
provide nutritious meals, friendly visits, 
and safety checks to older adults . You can 
search the website for meal programs in 
your community . 
National Adult Day Services Association 
877-745-1440 
info@nadsa.org
www.nadsa.org
The National Adult Day Services Association 
provides information about adult day 
services and a search feature to locate a 
center near you . 

Caregiving comes with many responsibilities, from helping with housework 
to driving an older person to doctor’s appointments . It can be helpful to divide 
up the caregiving duties among family and friends . You can use this checklist to help you 
coordinate . It is arranged by type of task, such as “health and medical care .” Add other 
activities as needed and note who is taking care of each one in the “Caregiver” column. 
Type of task
Related activities 
Caregiver
Household needs
Do laundry and other housework
Prepare meals, with awareness 
of any special diets or dietary 
restrictions
Shop for food and other necessities
Assist with home maintenance, 
such as making repairs and doing 
yardwork
Provide transportation, such as car 
rides to appointments
Self-care, 
supervision,
and mobility 
Assist with personal care, such as 
bathing, dressing, eating, and using 
the toilet
Help with getting in and out of beds 
and chairs
Getting around inside or outside
the home
Worksheet: Coordinating Caregiving 
Responsibilities
W O R K S H E E T : C O O R D I N AT I N G C A R E G I V I N G R E S P O N S I B I L I T I E S

Type of task
Related activities 
Caregiver
Emotional and 
social support
Provide companionship and 
someone to talk to
Encourage the person to participate 
in hobbies and other leisure 
activities
Help the person manage their 
feelings
Troubleshoot problems that come up
Provide respite care to a primary 
caregiver
Health and
medical care
Encourage a healthy lifestyle and 
self-care
Keep track of medicines and make 
sure they are taken at the right time
Manage other medical care at 
home, such as wound care or
giving shots
Respond to acute needs and 
emergencies
Coordinating care
Find out information and keep other 
caregivers up to date on changing 
conditions
Manage a shared notebook and 
calendar to coordinate care among 
family members and friends
Communicate with doctors, nurses, 
pharmacists, and other health care 
providers
W O R K S H E E T : C O O R D I N AT I N G C A R E G I V I N G R E S P O N S I B I L I T I E S

Type of task
Related activities 
Caregiver
Coordinating care 
(continued)
Locate, arrange, and supervise 
nurses, social workers, home care 
aides, and other service providers
Coordinate medical appointments
Participate in treatment decisions
Order and pick up prescription 
medicines
Financial and
legal
Handle financial matters, such as 
paying bills and managing budgets
Manage legal matters, including 
official records such as wills and 
insurance policies
Participate in advanced care 
planning
Other tasks
W O R K S H E E T : C O O R D I N AT I N G C A R E G I V I N G R E S P O N S I B I L I T I E S

Worksheet: Home Safety Checklist
The following room-by-room checklist can alert you to potential hazards 
in an older person’s home . Use it to identify any changes or repairs needed 
to help keep them safe . Keep in mind that it may not be necessary to make all of 
the suggested changes . It is important, however, to reevaluate home safety every so often as 
the person’s behavior and needs change. 
Throughout the home
Are any repairs needed?
Is the house well lit, inside and out, particularly at the top and bottom of stairs?
Do any lightbulbs need to be replaced? 
Are emergency phone numbers (ambulance, Poison Control, doctors, hospital, etc .) 
and the person’s home address near all telephones?
Is there clutter, which can cause disorientation and confusion and increase the risk
of falling?
Is mail, recycling, or trash piling up? Do there need to be more trash and recycling 
containers around the house?
Is each bottle of prescription medicine clearly labeled with the person’s name, name 
of the drug, drug strength, dosage frequency, and expiration date? 
If there are guns in the home, are they locked up and unloaded, with ammunition 
stored separately? 
Floors
Are there any tripping hazards at exterior entrances or inside the house (throw rugs, 
for example)? 
Are there non-slip strips or mats on tile and wood floors or surfaces that may get 
wet? Are carpets fixed firmly to the floor? 
Are all walking areas free of furniture and extension and electrical cords?
Have smoke and carbon monoxide alarms been installed near the kitchen and in all 
bedrooms? Have the batteries been checked recently?
Stairs
Are the stairs manageable, or is a ramp or gate needed?
Could handrails be installed on both sides of the staircase?
W O R K S H E E T : H O M E S A F E T Y C H E C K L I S T

Is there at least one stairway handrail that extends beyond the first and last steps
on each flight of stairs?
Are any outdoor steps sturdy and textured to prevent falls in wet or icy weather?
Mark the edges of steps with bright or reflective tape.
Bathrooms
Are there grab bars near toilets and in the tub or shower?
Have nonskid adhesive strips, decals, or mats been placed in the tub and shower? 
If the bathroom is uncarpeted, consider placing these strips next to the tub, toilet, 
and sink as well .
Have a plastic shower stool and a hand-held shower head been installed to make 
bathing easier?
Is the water heater set at 120° F to avoid scalding tap water?
Is there a night light to make overnight trips to the bathroom safer?
Kitchen
Are there safety knobs and an automatic shut-off switch on the stove?
Is there enough food in the fridge? Is any of it spoiled? Are there staple foods (such 
as cereal, sugar, canned soup) in the cabinets? 
Has a drain trap been installed in the kitchen sink to catch anything that may 
otherwise become lost or clog the plumbing?
Outdoors
Are there secure locks on all outside doors and windows?
If a walker or wheelchair is needed, can the entrances to the house be modified — 
perhaps by putting in a ramp to the front door? 
Is there a small bench or table by the entry door to hold bags and packages while 
unlocking the door?
Is outside lighting adequate? Light sensors that turn on lights automatically as you 
approach the house may be useful .
Have bushes and foliage been pruned away from walkways and doorways?
If there is a swimming pool, is it safe? Restrict access to a swimming pool by fencing 
it with a locked gate, covering it, and closely supervising it when in use .
Have you addressed any uneven surfaces or walkways, hoses, and other objects that 
may cause a person to trip?
W O R K S H E E T : H O M E S A F E T Y C H E C K L I S T

Before signing an agreement for home health care or geriatric care 
management, get as much information as you can about the services, fees, terms, 
and restrictions . You can use this worksheet to help you collect information about each 
service you’re considering . 
Name of service provider: __________________________________________________________________________________ 
Contact person: _______________________________________________________ Date: ______________________________ 
Is your service licensed and 
accredited by the state or local 
government and/or a professional 
association?
How long have you been providing 
care management services?
What are your fees? Will you provide 
information on fees in writing prior to 
starting services?
What is included and not included in 
your services?
How many days per week and hours 
per day will a care provider come to 
my home?
Is there a minimum number of hours 
required?
Worksheet: Questions To Ask Before
Hiring a Care Provider 






W O R K S H E E T : Q U E S T I O N S T O A S K B E F O R E H I R I N G A C A R E P R O V I D E R

Will it be the same provider
each time?
How do you check the background 
and experience of your care 
providers? Can you provide 
references?
How do you train your care 
providers?
Are you available for emergencies 
around the clock? What types of 
emergency care can you provide?
How will you communicate 
information to me?
Who do I contact if there is a 
problem?
If I wish to discontinue services, how 
much notice do you require?
Other questions to ask:
Notes








W O R K S H E E T : Q U E S T I O N S T O A S K B E F O R E H I R I N G A C A R E P R O V I D E R

In some cases, it makes sense for an older parent, relative, or friend to move 
into your home so you can take care of them . If you’re considering whether that’s 
the right arrangement for you, here are some questions to think about:  
Is there space in your home? Is the home safe and accessible for an older person?
How does the older person feel about moving into your home? How do you and 
others in the household feel about it? Do you get along well? 
Is someone around to help the older person during the day? Is transportation 
available?
What is the older adult able to do for themselves? What do they need help with? 
What personal care are you willing and able to provide — for example, moving the 
person from a chair to a bed or toilet, giving medications, changing incontinence 
pads, or bathing? 
Are there other family members, friends, or neighbors nearby who can help care for 
the older person? 
What services for older adults are available in your community? Can you afford to 
hire professional services to assist with caregiving? 
What kind of specialized medical care is available nearby? Will the person have to 
switch doctors or other health care providers? 
What other living options are available? Have you considered all the alternatives?
Worksheet: Questions To Consider Before 
Moving an Older Adult Into Your Home 
WO R KS H E E T : Q U E S T I O N S T O C O N S I D E R B E F O R E M OV I N G A N O L D E R A D U LT I N T O YO U R H O M E

The person you’re caring for may be taking multiple prescription drugs, as well as over-the-counter 
medicines and dietary supplements . It can be confusing to keep track of everything! This form can help . 
Because medication regimens may change over time, consider making copies of this form to use in the future . Or you can 
download additional copies from NIA’s website at www.nia.nih.gov/health/twyd-worksheets . Try to bring a current list of 
medications and supplements to every doctor appointment .
Name of 
medication or 
supplement
What it’s 
for
Date 
started
When and 
how often 
it’s taken
Dose
Color/
shape
Prescribing 
doctor
Concerns
Worksheet: Managing Medications and Supplements 
W O R K S H E E T : M A N A G I N G M E D I C AT I O N S A N D S U P P L E M E N T S

W O R K S H E E T : M A N A G I N G M E D I C AT I O N S A N D S U P P L E M E N T S
Name of 
medication or 
supplement
What it’s 
for
Date 
started
When and 
how often 
it’s taken
Dose
Color/
shape
Prescribing 
doctor
Concerns

W O R K S H E E T : I M P O R TA N T D O C U M E N T S A N D PA P E R W O R K
It can be helpful to store an older person’s official records and legal 
documents together in one place so you can access them quickly when you need 
them. Keep these materials somewhere safe and easy to find, like a fireproof lock box. This 
checklist can help you figure out what information to assemble. 
Personal Records
Personal information, such as their Social Security number, date and place of birth, 
and education and military records. 
Identity documents including Social Security card, passport, name change 
documentation, and a copy of their driver’s license or other ID card. 
Vital records such as birth and death certificates, and certificates of marriage, 
divorce, citizenship, or adoption. 
Contact information for children, neighbors, other close family and friends, lawyers, 
financial advisors, and religious contacts. 
Legal documents including advance directives, powers of attorney, trusts, and the 
most up-to-date will with the person’s original signature. 
Health information, such as a list of diagnoses and medications, and contact 
information for health care providers. 
Usernames and passwords for online banking, bill paying, and other critical services .
Financial Records
Banking information, including the name of their bank(s) and account numbers for 
checking, saving, money market, and other accounts . Location of safe deposit box 
and key. 
Assets and income, such as pensions from their employer, Social Security, IRAs, 
401(k)s, and other investment income . Include the name and contact information for 
any financial professionals. 
Worksheet: Important Documents 
and Paperwork 

Debts and other liabilities including loans, lines of credit, and mortgages. 
Credit and debit card companies, authorized users, account numbers, and balances. 
Insurance information such as Medicare, Medicaid, private health insurance, long-
term care insurance, and life insurance . Include policy numbers and the name and 
contact information of insurance agents. 
Homeowner information including property taxes, homeowner’s insurance policies, 
warranties or service plans, and the original deed of trust for the home. 
Car paperwork, including car title and registration, details of any car loans, and auto 
insurance policies. 
Recent income tax returns and related documentation .
W O R K S H E E T : I M P O R TA N T D O C U M E N T S A N D PA P E R W O R K

NIH Publication No . 23-AG-5496
February 2023
National Institute 
on Aging