Tips for Taking
Medicines Safely
as You Age
Medicines are intended to help us live longer
and healthier lives, but taking medicines the
wrong way or mixing certain drugs and supplements
can be dangerous. Older adults often have multiple
medical conditions and may take many medicines.
The following tips can help you safely take and 
keep track of all your medicines.
Mixing certain medicines can cause unpleasant and sometimes serious side effects.
Make sure you know about all medicines and supplements you take, including: 
• Prescription medications 
• Over-the-counter (nonprescription) drugs 
• Vitamins 
Be sure your doctor and pharmacist are also aware of everything you take. Also tell your health care provider
about alcohol, tobacco, and drug use. These substances can have harmful interactions with certain
medications and may change the way your medicines work. 
Ask your doctor or pharmacist any questions you have about your medications.
Possible questions include: 
• Why am I taking this medicine? How much medicine should I take and how often? 
• When will the medicine start working? How will I know if it’s working? 
• What are common side effects of this medication? What should I do if I experience serious side effects? 
• Is it safe to drive while taking this medicine? 
• Should I take the medicine with food?
• What should I do if I forget to take my medicine? 
Make a list of all prescription medicines, over-the-counter drugs, vitamins, and dietary supplements
you take. Keep one copy of the list in a safe place at home and one in your wallet or purse.
The list should include the:
• Name of each medicine or supplement 
• Amount you take 
• Time(s) you take it 
For prescription medicines, also include the: 
• Name of the doctor who prescribed it 
• Reason it was prescribed
• Dietary supplements 
• Herbal remedies 
Know What You’re Taking
Ask Questions About Your Medicines
Keep Track of Your Medicines
• Dietary supplements 
• Herbal remedies 
When you have a prescription filled, read everything on the prescription label and any
paper handouts that come with the medicine. Follow the instructions carefully. Here are some
dos and don’ts for taking your medicines the right way: 
• Keep your medicines out of the reach of children and pets. If you take any prescription pain
medicines (for example, morphine or codeine), keep them in a locked cabinet or drawer.
• Check the expiration dates on your medication bottles and discard any unused or expired medicines as soon
as possible. Timely disposal of medicines can reduce the risk of others taking them accidentally or misusing the 
medications on purpose.
• Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to safely discard expired or unneeded medications. 
National Institute on Aging Information Center 
800-222-2225 | 800-222-4225 (TTY)
niaic@nia.nih.gov | www.nia.nih.gov/health
NIH Publication No. 23-AG-7348 | December 2022
DO take the right dose. Don’t take a larger dose of a 
medicine, thinking it will help you more, and don’t skip 
or take half doses of a prescription drug to save money. 
Talk with your doctor or pharmacist if you can’t afford 
the medicine.
DO take medicine on time. Some people use meals 
or bedtime as reminders to take their medicine. You 
can also use charts, calendars, timers, or smartphone 
apps to help you remember when and how to take your 
medications each day. 
DO report problems. Call your doctor right away if you 
have any trouble with your medicines. There may be 
something else you can take. 
DON’T stop taking your medicine abruptly. If you 
have uncomfortable side effects, write them down 
so you can report them to your doctor or pharmacist 
accurately.
DON’T share medicines. Do not take medicines 
prescribed for another person or give yours to
someone else. 
DON’T take medicines in the dark. Turn on a light so 
you don’t make a mistake.
To learn more about taking medicines safely as you age, visit www.nia.nih.gov/medication-safety.
People age 65 and older tend to take more medicines than those in 
any other age group, often because they have several diseases or 
other health problems at the same time. Taking multiple medications 
can be expensive and difficult to track. It also can increase the risk of 
side effects and other unintended problems.
If you are concerned that you might be taking too many medications, 
or you can’t afford all your medications, have a conversation with 
your health care provider about whether there are any you could 
safely reduce or stop. But don’t stop taking your medicine before 
talking with your doctor.
Do I Need To 
Take So Many 
Medications?
Follow Instructions
Store and Dispose of Medicines Safely