Understanding 
Memory Loss
What To Do When You Have 
Trouble Remembering
From the National Institute on Aging
Table of Contents
What’s Inside? 

Memory Changes With Age 

Signs of Serious Memory Problems 

Conditions That May Cause Memory Problems 

Mild Cognitive Impairment 

Dementia 

Alzheimer’s Disease 

Vascular Dementia 

Lewy Body Dementia 

Frontotemporal Disorders 

Other Causes of Memory Problems 

How To Support Someone With Memory Loss 

Points To Remember 

Words To Know 

For More Information 

Use the Table of Contents to help you find things 
quickly. Also, we put some medical terms in bold, such 
as brain scan. You can find out how to say these words 
and what they mean in the “Words to Know” section 
on page 21.
What’s Inside?
We’ve all forgotten a name, where we put our keys, or if 
we locked the front door. It’s normal to forget things once 
in a while. However, forgetting how to use the phone, not 
knowing how to find your way home, or missing more 
than one monthly payment may be signs of a more serious 
memory problem.
This booklet will help you 
learn about: 
• The difference between mild forgetfulness and 
 
more serious memory problems
• Causes of memory problems and how to manage 
 
memory changes
• How to cope with serious memory problems


Mary’s Story
 
Mary couldn’t find her car keys. She looked on the 
hook just inside the front door. They weren’t there. She 
searched in her purse. No luck. Finally, she found them 
on her desk. Yesterday, she forgot her neighbor’s name. 
She feels like her memory is playing tricks on her and has 
started to worry. 
She decided to see her doctor. After a complete 
checkup, the doctor reassured her that she was fine. Her 
forgetfulness was likely just a normal part of growing 
older. The doctor suggested that Mary continue to make 
healthy food choices, be physically and socially active, and 
manage her high blood pressure. These things are good 
for her physical health and may help her maintain her 
memory longer.

Memory Changes With Age
Getting older changes all parts of the body, including the 
brain. As a result, some people notice that they don’t remem­
ber information as well as they once did and aren’t able to 
recall it as quickly. It may take longer to learn new things or 
remember certain words. You may lose things around the 
house or forget to pay a bill. Changes like these are often signs 
of mild forgetfulness, not serious memory problems.
There are a variety of techniques that may help you stay 
healthy and adapt to changes in memory and mental skills. 
Here are some ideas:
• Learn a new skill.
• Follow a daily routine. 
• Use to-do lists, notes, and calendars to help plan tasks.
• Put items you use frequently in the same place each day.
• Stay involved in activities that can help keep both your 
mind and body active. 
• Volunteer in your community, at a school, or at your place 
of worship.
• Spend time with friends and family.
• Try to sleep at least seven to nine hours each night.
• Stay physically active and eat well. 
• Prevent or control high blood pressure.
• Avoid or limit alcohol.
• Get help if you feel depressed for weeks at a time.

Signs of Serious
Memory Problems
Unlike normal forgetfulness, serious memory problems 
make it hard to do everyday tasks. For example, you may 
find it difficult to drive, find the bathroom in your home, 
or recognize friends and family. Other signs of serious 
memory problems may include:
• Asking the same questions over and over again
• Getting lost in places you used to know well
• Having trouble following recipes or directions
• Becoming more confused about time, people, and places
• Not taking care of yourself — eating poorly, not bathing, 
or behaving unsafely
Many things can cause serious memory problems, such as 
blood clots, depression, and Alzheimer’s disease or related 
dementias. Once you know the cause of your memory 
problems, you can find ways to help manage them.
Worried About Your Forgetfulness? 
Talk with a health care provider. Tell them about your 
concerns. Be sure to make a follow-up appointment to 
check your memory in the next six months to a year. 
If you think you might forget, ask a family member, 
friend, or the doctor’s office to remind you.

Conditions That May Cause 
Memory Problems 
If you are having signs of a serious memory problem, 
a doctor can help you figure out the cause. Some serious 
memory problems can be treated or managed. For conditions 
that won’t go away, like Alzheimer’s or another dementia, 
doctors can help you cope with the symptoms.

Mild Cognitive Impairment
Some older adults have a condition called mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), meaning they have more memory or 
thinking problems than other people their age. People 
with MCI can usually take care of themselves and are able 
to carry out their day-to-day tasks. MCI may be an early 
sign of Alzheimer’s, but not everyone with MCI will 
develop Alzheimer’s. 
A doctor can do thinking, memory, and language tests to 
see if you have MCI. They may also suggest that you see 
a specialist for more tests. Since MCI may be an early sign 
of more serious memory problems, it’s important to see a 
doctor or a specialist every six to 12 months.
At this time, there is no standard treatment for MCI, but there 
are things you can do that may help you stay healthy and deal 
with changes in your memory. Check out the list on page 4 
for suggestions on some ways to help your memory.

Anna and Marie’s Story
Anna thought that her mother, Marie, was still going 
strong at 85. She kept busy with friends and church 
activities. But recently, Anna started to notice changes. 
Her mother was becoming more forgetful and confused. 
Also, she was spending a lot of time alone in her house. 
One day, she even got lost on her way home from 
grocery shopping. 
Anna knew it was time to get help and took her mother to 
the doctor. The doctor told them that Marie has dementia. 
It has been tough, but learning about ways to manage the 
disease and what to expect in the future has helped the 
whole family. Anna and Marie are taking life one day at 
a time.

Dementia
Dementia is not a normal part of aging. People with demen­
tia lose their ability to think, remember, learn, and reason, 
which makes everyday activities challenging. Memory loss, 
though common, is not the only sign of dementia. People 
with dementia may also struggle to find the right word to 
use, have trouble paying attention, or see and hear things that 
are not there. Some people experience personality changes.
Differences Between Normal Aging 
and Dementia
Age-Related Forgetfulness
Dementia
Making a bad decision 
once in a while
Making poor judgments 
and decisions often
Missing a 
monthly payment
Missing monthly 
payments often
Forgetting which day it is 
and remembering later
Losing track of the date 
or time of year
Sometimes forgetting 
which word to use
Trouble having 
a conversation
Losing things from time 
to time
Misplacing things 
often and being unable 
to find them

There are different types of dementia, and symptoms may 
vary from person to person. Types of dementia include: 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s causes memory problems that worsen slowly 
over time. People with Alzheimer’s have trouble thinking 
clearly and may find it hard to do everyday things like shop­
ping, driving, and cooking. As the disease gets worse, people 
with Alzheimer’s may need someone to take care of all their 
daily needs at home or in a nursing home. These needs may 
include feeding, bathing, and dressing. 
Vascular Dementia
Signs of vascular dementia can begin gradually or can occur 
suddenly. This is because, in vascular dementia, memory 
loss and confusion are caused by changes in the blood supply 
to the brain, often after a stroke. If the person has additional 
strokes, vascular dementia may get worse. If the strokes 
stop, a person may get better or stay the same for a long 
time. People with vascular dementia can reduce their risk of 
having additional strokes by managing their blood pressure, 
cholesterol, and diabetes.
Lewy Body Dementia
In Lewy body dementia, proteins form clumps in the 
brain called Lewy bodies. This can lead to problems with 
thinking, movement, behavior, and mood. Like Alzheimer’s, 
symptoms of Lewy body dementia get worse over time. 
People with Lewy body dementia may see or hear things that 
are not there and may have trouble thinking, remembering, 
and sleeping. Lewy body dementia can also cause movement 
problems that may make the person shake, lose their balance, 
or walk more stiffly. 

Frontotemporal Disorders
Frontotemporal disorders are rare and usually affect 
people at a younger age than other types of dementia. Most 
people with frontotemporal disorders are 45 to 65 years 
old. Frontotemporal disorders happen when nerve cells 
in certain parts of the brain are damaged. The damage can 
cause unusual behaviors, emotional problems, trouble 
communicating, difficulty with work, or difficulty with 
walking. The symptoms of frontotemporal disorders get 
worse over time.

Serious Memory Problems: Next Steps 
If you think you may have a serious memory problem 
like dementia, talk to a doctor. To find out if you have 
dementia, doctors can:
• Give you a physical exam and ask about past 
medical problems 
• Review a list of all the medications you take 
• Ask questions about your family’s health 
• Find out how well you can do everyday things 
like driving, shopping for food, and paying bills 
• Ask questions about your mental health 
• Talk with family about your memory problems 
• Test your memory, problem-solving, counting, 
and language skills 
• Check your blood and urine, and do other 
medical tests
• Order brain scans to look for signs of disease 
Some of the tests and procedures used to diagnose 
dementia may not be covered by health insurance. 
Check with your insurance provider and talk with your 
health care team to determine what options may work 
best for you.
An early diagnosis may help you find ways to manage 
the condition and plan for the future. In the early stages 
of dementia, it might be possible to continue with 
some everyday activities. As the disease progresses, 
you will need to adopt new strategies to help adjust.


James’ Story
A few months ago, James noticed that he was having a 
harder time remembering things. He lost his appetite 
and couldn’t sleep through the night. He didn’t feel like 
talking to his friends on the phone. He became confused 
and irritable. James decided to go to the doctor to see if 
something was wrong. His doctor said that he was having 
a bad reaction to one of his medications. Once his doctor 
changed the medication, James felt more like himself. 

Other Causes of Memory Problems 
It’s possible for memory problems to result from factors 
unrelated to dementia or normal aging. For example, medical 
conditions, such as depression or blood clots, can cause 
memory problems. These problems usually go away once the 
condition is successfully treated.
Factors that may cause memory problems include:
• Head injury, such as a concussion
• Blood clots, tumors, or infections in the brain
• Thyroid, kidney, or liver problems
• Medication side effects
• Mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety
• Alcohol or drug misuse
• Sleep problems
• Low levels of important nutrients, such as vitamin B12
• Not eating enough healthy foods
Major, traumatic, or stressful life events can also cause 
memory problems. For example, someone who has recently 
experienced the death of a loved one may experience strong 
negative emotions that leave them confused or forgetful.
These memory problems from negative emotions are usually 
temporary and will improve as the stress and emotions fade. 
Being physically active, staying connected with friends 
and loved ones, and learning new skills can help with both 
memory and improving mood. If memory problems persist 
after a few weeks, talk with a doctor, as this may be a sign of 
something more serious.

Finding the cause of memory problems is important for de­
termining the best course of action. Once the cause is diag­
nosed, you and your doctor can determine the best plan to 
manage symptoms. People with memory problems should 
make a follow-up appointment to check their memory every 
six to 12 months.
A Note About Unproven Memory 
Enhancements or Treatments 
Some people may be tempted by untried or unproven 
over-the-counter drugs and other products that claim 
to make the brain sharper or prevent dementia. Be 
cautious of pills, supplements, brain training computer 
games, and similar treatments that promise to improve 
memory or prevent brain disorders. These might be 
unsafe, a waste of money, or both. They might even 
interfere with other medical treatments. Consult with 
a doctor before investing in any of these products.
Currently, there are no drugs or lifestyle approaches 
that can prevent Alzheimer’s or a related dementia. 
In the meantime, generally leading a healthy lifestyle, 
including controlling high blood pressure, being 
physically active, and making healthy dietary choices, 
can help reduce your risk of many chronic health 
conditions and may help reduce your risk of dementia.

Gloria visits her Aunt Vivian every weekend to cook with 
her and help around the house. Aunt Vivian is usually 
very active — she loves gardening, listening to music, and 
chatting with friends. But lately, her mood has started to 
change. She seems sad all the time and just wants to sleep 
all day and night. When Aunt Vivian started becoming 
really forgetful, Gloria was afraid something was wrong, 
so she took her to see a doctor. The doctor said Aunt 
Vivian had depression. He prescribed medication and 
recommended that she see a counselor or therapist. 
After three months, Gloria could see the change in Aunt 
Vivian. Her memory is better, she is eating and sleeping 
better, spending more time with friends, and doing 
volunteer work.
 
Gloria’s Story


How To Support Someone 
With Memory Loss
If your family member or friend has a serious memory 
problem, you can help them live as normal a life as possible. 
Encourage them to stay physically active and keep up with 
their everyday routines. Remind them of the time of day, 
where they live, and what is happening at home and in the 
world. Tell them when it is time to take their medication and 
go with them to visit the doctor. 
Some families use the following tools and strategies to help 
with memory problems:
• Large calendars to highlight important dates and events 
• Lists of the plans for each day 
• Notes about safety in the home 
• Written directions for using common household items 
• Medication reminders using mobile technology, such as 
smartphone apps or a device that can be worn on the wrist 
• Maps and location services on mobile phones to 
provide directions or help family members know a 
person’s location
Communication can be hard for someone with serious 
memory problems. These tips can help make 
communication easier:
• Make eye contact and call the person by name.
• Be aware of your tone, how loud your voice is, how you 
look at the person, and your body language.

• Use other methods besides speaking, such as 
gentle touching.
• Be patient with angry outbursts. Remember, it’s the 
illness “talking,” not the person.
• Try distracting the person if communication leads to 
a conflict or makes the person agitated or stressed. For 
example, look through a photo album together.
• Be open to the person’s concerns, even if they are hard 
to understand.

Clinical Trials and Studies
Scientists are trying to better understand causes and 
potential treatments for memory problems. Joining 
a clinical trial or other research study is a way to help 
scientists understand aging and memory loss.
Scientists need different types of people to volunteer 
for research, including people with:
• Alzheimer’s or MCI
• A family history of Alzheimer’s or another 
dementia
• No memory problems and no family history of 
Alzheimer’s
To learn more about clinical trials, you can call the 
Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education and 
Referral (ADEAR) Center at 800-438-4380 or email 
adear@mail.nih.gov. 
You can also search for clinical trials near you at www.
alzheimers.gov/clinical-trials.

Points To Remember
• There are differences between normal forgetfulness and 
more serious memory problems.
• It’s important to know about the causes of more serious 
memory problems and recognize the signs.
• You can get help and support for mild and serious 
memory problems. 
If you are having trouble with your memory, work with a 
doctor to figure out what is causing the issues so you can 
get the most helpful treatment and support. Figuring out 
what’s happening can also help you plan for the future. Some 
memory problems get worse over time, and planning ahead 
can enable you to make decisions about health, legal, and 
financial matters as early as possible.

Words To Know
Alzheimer’s disease
(Allz-high-merz duh-zeez)
A disease that causes previously healthy nerve cells in the 
brain to stop working properly and eventually die, resulting 
in widespread loss of brain function. These changes make it 
hard for a person to remember things, have clear thinking, 
and make good judgments. The symptoms vary from person 
to person and get worse over time. 
Brain scan
(brayn skan)
A type of test a doctor may use to look for changes in the 
brain. While a person lies down, an instrument takes 
pictures to show normal and problem areas of the brain.
Dementia 
(duh-men-shuh) 
A loss of cognitive functioning. This means changes to a 
person’s thinking, remembering, reasoning, and behavior 
that make daily life and activities difficult to manage.
Frontotemporal disorders 
(frun-toe-tem-pour-ul diss-or-derz) 
Also called FTD. A group of medical conditions caused by 
damage to nerve cells in specific areas of the brain. The signs 
can occur in both younger and older adults. These signs 
may include unusual behaviors, emotional problems, 
trouble communicating, difficulty with work, or difficulty 
with walking.

Lewy body dementia 
(Lew-ee baa-dee duh-men-shuh)
Also called LBD. A medical condition caused by changes in 
the brain from abnormal protein clusters, called Lewy bodies. 
Early on, the signs of LBD may be very mild but increase over 
time. Signs include problems with thinking, movement, 
behavior, and mood.
Mild cognitive impairment
(mild kog-ni-tiv im-pair-ment)
Also called MCI. A medical condition that causes people to 
have more memory problems than other people their age. 
The signs of MCI are not as severe as those of Alzheimer’s. 
They include losing things often, forgetting to go to events 
and appointments, and having more trouble coming up with 
the right words. 
Vascular dementia
(vas-kue-ler duh-men-shuh)
A medical condition caused by changes in the blood supply 
to the brain, often after a stroke. Signs can begin gradually or 
can occur suddenly. These signs include changes in memory, 
language, thinking skills, and mood.

For More Information
Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education and Re­
ferral (ADEAR) Center 
800-438-4380 
adear@nia.nih.gov | www.alzheimers.gov 
The NIA ADEAR Center offers information and free print 
publications about Alzheimer’s and related dementias for 
families, caregivers, and health professionals. ADEAR Center 
staff answer telephone, email, and written requests and make 
referrals to local and national resources.
Alzheimers.gov
www.alzheimers.gov
Visit Alzheimers.gov for information and resources on 
Alzheimer’s and related dementias from across the federal 
government.
National Institute of Mental Health
866-615-6464
nimhinfo@nih.gov | www.nimh.nih.gov
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
800-352-9424 
braininfo@ninds.nih.gov | www.ninds.nih.gov
Eldercare Locator 
800-677-1116 
eldercarelocator@USAging.org | https://eldercare.acl.gov 

Alzheimer’s Association 
800-272-3900
info@alz.org | www.alz.org
Alzheimer’s Foundation of America 
866-232-8484
info@alzfdn.org | www.alzfdn.org
Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration 
866-507-7222
info@theaftd.org | www.theaftd.org
Lewy Body Dementia Association 
800-539-9767 (Lewy Line)
404-935-6444
www.lbda.org
McKnight Brain Research Foundation 
https://mcknightbrain.org 
National Institute 
on Aging
NIH Publication No. 24-AG-5442
April 2024